1.1 What is Chemistry?
Chemistry is the branch of science which deals with the properties,
composition and the structure of substances.
It also deals with the physical and
chemical changes in matter and the laws or principles which govern these
changes.
Determination of composition represents finding out percentages of
elements and compounds in a sample of matter.
Structure of matter means the
arrangement of atoms in matter.
Both physical and chemical changes may be
brought about by absorption or evolution of energy.
Branches of Chemistry
To understand the widely spread complex subject of chemistry and to
concentrate on its specific aspects, chemistry is divided into many distinct
branches.
These branches have distinct areas of study for the scientists to focus
on and to achieve breakthroughs and advancements.
1.Physical Chemistry
This branch investigates how substances behave at atomic and molecular
levels.
It provides clear explanation as to how fundamental physical laws
governing our world cause atoms and molecules to show specific characteristics
and in turn react to give huge structures related to life.
Physical chemistry is also
used to predict and change the rates of reactions and thus optimize the
conditions to carry out the reactions on industrial scale.
2.
Inorganic Chemistry
It is the study of the synthesis, composition, properties and structure of
elements and compounds that contain little or no carbon.
An inorganic
substance can be composed of metals, nonmetals or a mixture of these, salts,
acids and bases.
Inorganic compounds are used as fertilizers, medicines,
catalysts, pigments, coatings and much more.
3.
Organic Chemistry
It is the branch of chemistry that deals with the carbon compounds
(hydrocarbons and their derivatives) other than its simple salts like carbonates,
bicarbonates, oxides and carbides.
In this branch, we study the structure,
formation, properties, composition and reactions of carbon containing
compounds.
Organic compounds are found in all forms of life and are also
essential for life.
4.
Environmental Chemistry
It is the scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that
occur in this planet.
In this subject, we study the sources, reactions, effects and
fates of chemical species in the air, soil and water environments.
Without this, it
would be impossible to study the effects that humans have on the environment
through the release of chemicals.
It helps in understanding the causes, effects
and solutions of different types of pollution.
5.
Analytical Chemistry
This branch of chemistry deals with the analysis of different substances.
It
involves separation, identification and determination of the concentration of the
components present in material things.
Nowadays the field of analytical
chemistry generally involves the use of modern and sophisticated instruments to
analyze the matter.
6.
Biochemistry
It is the branch of chemistry in which we understand life through chemical
processes.
It is the study of chemical substances and vital processes occurring in
living organisms.
Biochemistry provides insights into the structure and function
of molecules such as proteins, carbohydrates, lipids and nucleic acids.
7.
Nuclear Chemistry
Nuclear chemistry deals with the reactions taking place in the nucleus of
an atom.
It deals with radioactivity, nuclear processes and transformation in the
nuclei of atoms.
Nuclear chemistry has many applications in agriculture,
medicine, industry and research.
8.
Polymer Chemistry
Polymers are large molecules made by linking together a series of
building blocks.
Polymer chemistry focuses on the properties, structure and
synthesis of polymers and macromolecules.
Many materials present in the living
organisms including proteins, cellulose and nucleic acids are naturally occurring
polymers.
9.
Geochemistry
The study of chemical composition of Earth and its sources and minerals is
called geochemistry.
Apart from its use in minerals exploration, geochemical
mapping today has applications in environmental monitoring, forestry and
medical research.
\ul
yy,
Geothermal heat pump uses a pump to transfer underground water into the
buildings during the winter
to heat them and in the summer to cool them.
10.
Medicinal Chemistry
In this branch of chemistry, the chemist tries to design and synthesize
medicines or drugs which are beneficial for mankind.
It includes the discovery,
delivery, absorption and metabolism of drugs in human body.
11.
Astrochemistry
It is the study of molecules and ions recurring in space and interstellar
space.
In this discipline we study the abundance and reactions of atoms,
molecules and ions in the universe and interaction of these species with radiation.
A lunar mission has recently brought samples from the Moon.
The following
experiments were then carried out on it.
Point out the branch of chemistry
these experiments are related to.
Experiment
Branch of Chemistry
Determining its composition
Studying the physical properties
of materials
itcontains
3.
Carrying out chemical reactions
with usual inorganic reagents
1.2 States of Matter
This world is made up of matter and energy.
Energy is non-material in
nature.
Anything other than energy which carries weight and occupies volume is
called matter.
We encounter material things everywhere in all sorts of different
and distinct forms.
A state of matter is one of the many distinct forms in which matter can
exist.
We observe four states of matter in everyday life: solid, liquid, gas and
plasma.
Apart from these, there are more states of matter which we do not see in
our everyday life.
a
The three primary states of matter are the solid, liquid and gaseous.
They
are different from each other due to different strength of intermolecular forces,
the arrangement of particles and the distance between the particles .
In
gases, molecules are very widely apart with no order whatsoever and very weak
intermolecular forces.
All these features make gases easily compressible.
Their
densities are obviously very low.
The liquids, on the other hand, have molecules which are closely attached
but moving randomly.
There exists significant intermolecular forces between
their molecules.
Liquids are therefore not easily compressible and their densities
have higher values than those ofgases.
Solids have a definite shape and a fixed volume.
Particles in solids are
closely packed and have very strong interatomic or intermolecular attractions.
The particles in solids remain fixed at their positions where they can oscillate
about their mean positions.
Solids are relatively incompressible and rigid.
The densities of solids are very high.
Solids are the only state of matter
which do not need any container to be stored.
In crystalline solids, particles are
perfectly arranged and strongly bonded.
This makes them almost
incompressible.
They are the most dense substances.
Plasma is not so generally seen form of matter.
It is composed of particles
with very high kinetic energy.
It exists in fluorescent tubes, lightning and welding
arcs.
Plasma can be considered as a partially ionized gas containing electrons,
ions, photons, etc.
Matter also exits in intermediate states where liquid meets gas and liquid
meets solid, for example supercritical fluids, liquid crystals and graphene.
Supercritical fluids are highly compressed states which show both properties of
gases and liquids.
Chemical reactions which may not be carried out in
conventional solvents, may possibly be carried out in supercritical carbon
dioxide.
So
liquid
States of Matter
bad
gas
Liquid crystal is a state of matter whose properties are between those of
conventional liquids and those of crystalline solids.
Liquid crystals are used in
display devices including computer monitors, clocks, watches and navigation
systems.
Graphene is an example of two-dimensional crystal, a single layer of
carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal pattern.
Graphene is a tough, flexible and
light material with a high resistance .
States of matter that are not commonly encountered are called exotic
states of matter.
Examples are dark matter, Bose-Einstein condensate, nuclear
matter, quantum spin liquid and many others.
1.3 Element, Compound and Mixture
Matter in this world exists in the form of elements, compounds and
mixtures.
Element is the simplest form of matter.
It is a pure substance
containing the same kind of atoms.
It cannot be broken down into simpler
substances by ordinary chemical reactions.
Elements exist in all three forms;
solid, liquid and gas.
Most of the elements found in this world exist in solid form.
Liquid and gaseous elements are very few in number as compared to solids, .
Elements may be a metal, a non-metal, a metalloid and a noble gas.
Elements can also exist in the form of atoms, molecules, ions and isotopes.
Examples of important elements are sodium, potassium, magnesium, calcium,
carbon, silicon, nitrogen, oxygen, chlorine, helium, copper, gold, zinc, silver,
nickel, cobalt, mercury, bromine and iodine, etc.
Compound is also a pure substance.
It is made up of two or more different
chemically elements combined in a fixed ratio.
When elements come together,
they react with each other and form chemical bonds that are not easy to break,
Compounds may be molecular, ionic, intermetallic and coordination
complexes.
Compounds may also be inorganic and organic in nature.
Examples
of important compounds are water, anmonia, methane, carbon dioxide, sodium
carbonate, potassium chloride, starch, proteins, carbohydrates, mineral acids,
organic acids, etc.
The composition and properties of an element or a compound are
uniform throughout a given sample and from one sample to another.
A mixture
is formed when more than one types of elements or compounds are mixed
together in any ratio.
Air, soil, milk and tap water are everyday examples of
mixtures.
A mixture may be homogeneous or heterogeneous.
A solution of salt
and water is an example of homogeneous mixture because its concentration is
uniform throughout.
A sample of rock is an example of heterogeneous mixture
because the concentration of its constituents is different in its different parts.
Rocks are composed of different types of minerals such as granite, mica and
limestone, .
\\l
~(_)
Interesting Information! \
Many elements are found in nature but some are artificial.
Technetium was
first element created by scientists in the laboratory.
eee
: Mixtures
1.4 Allotropic Forms of Substances
Elements may exist in more than one structural forms which can exhibit
quite different physical and chemical properties.
These forms are called
allotropic forms and phenomenon is called allotropy.
Element oxygen exists in
two allotropic forms namely oxygen (O2) and ozone (Os).
Similarly, carbon exists in three main allotropic forms, diamond, graphite
and Buckminster fullerene.
Diamond has a giant macromolecular structure
whereas graphite has a layered structure of hexagonal rings of carbon.
Buckminster fullerene (Ceo) consists of spheres made of atoms arranged in
pentagons and hexagons.
Fullerenes are stable at high temperatures and high
pressures.
Being covalent in nature, they are soluble in organic solvents.
The
fullerene structure is unique in that the molecule is not charged, has no
boundaries and has no unpaired electrons.
They have a cage like structure.
Fullerene C,, has a low melting point.
It is soft and cannot conduct electricity.
Element sulphur also exists in two crystalline allotropic forms i.e. rhombic and
monocline; the former is more stable than the latter, .
Buckminsterfullerene
Graphite
Rhombic Sulphur
Monoclimic Sulphur
1.5 Differences between Elements, Compounds and Mixtures
Compounds
Elements
Mixtures
An element is the
A compound is a pure
Mixture is an impure
simplest form of matter.
substance.
It is formed
compound.
A sample of
It is a pure substance
by the chemical
matter having more
containing the same
combination of two or
than one type of
kind of atoms.
more atoms of different
elements or compounds
elements.
mixed together in any
ratio, is called a mixture.
It is not possible to
In
break down an element
atoms of elements must
mixture retains its
into simpler particles by
combine together by a
identity and specific
ordinary chemical
fixed ratio by weight.
For
properties.
reactions.
example, in water (H20)
a
compound, the
Each component of a
hydrogen and oxygen
are present in a fixed
ratio of 1:8 by weight.
When an element exists
It is possible to break a
A mixture may be
in the form of atoms, it
compound into its
homogeneous or
is represented by a
constituent elements
heterogeneous.
For
symbol.
For example,
by a chemical reaction.
example, the solution of
sodium and calcium are
For example, ammonia
common salt in water is
represented by their
can be converted back
a homogeneous mixture
symbols Na and Ca.
to nitrogen and
while a sample of rock is
hydrogen by a suitable
a heterogeneous
chemical reaction.
mixture.
Gaseous elements exist
The properties of a
The components of a
in the form of
compound are always
mixture are not
independent molecules,
different from the
chemically bound
for example, nitrogen
elements from which it is together and they can
(Nz), oxygen (Oz) and
formed.
For example, the be separated by
chlorine (Cl2).
Noble
properties of water are
gases, however, exist as
different from those of
mono atomic molecules. hydrogen and oxygen.
physical methods.
For example, helium
Compounds existinthe | The properties of a
(He) and argon (Ar).
form of molecules, for
mixture are the sum of
example hydrogen
those of its
chloride (HCl), ammonia
components.
(NH3) and water (H20).
Compounds may also
exist as network
arrangement oftheir
atoms.
For example, ionic
compounds like NaCl
and covalent compounds
like sand (SiO2).
| Exercise ] 1.
Which elements are found in pure state on Earth?
2.
Which elements are present in very small amounts on Earth?
1.6 Solution, Colloidal Solutionand Suspension
A solution is such a mixture in which solute particles are completely
homogenized in the solvent e.g. dissolution of sodium chloride or copper
sulphate in water.
The solute particles in such a solution cannot be seen by the
naked eye.
If solution is filtered, these particles pass through the pores of filter
paper leaving no residue.
Such a solution is called a true solution.
A suspension,
on the other hand, is a mixture in which solute particles do not dissolve in the
solvent.
We can actually see these particles.
If a suspension is kept for some time,
these particles settle down.
Again, if this suspension is filtered, the particles in it
cannot pass through the pores of filter paper and can be collected as a residue.
A
mixture of chalk in water is an example of suspension. .
a
————
Solution
Colloidal Solution
Suspension
Colloidal Solution and Suspension
Besides a true solution and a suspension, there is a third form of solution
called colloidal solution.
In this type, the solute particles do not homogenize with
solvent.
These particles are a little bit bigger than the solute particles present in
the true solution but not big enough to be seen with a naked eye like the particles
present in a suspension.
If kept for some time, the particles of a colloidal solution
do not settle down.
On filtration, these particles pass through the filter paper like
the particles of a true solution.
Starch solution and white of an egg are the
common examples of colloidal solutions.
1.7 Formation of Unsaturated and Saturated Solutions
Take about 100 g of water in a beaker, add to it 5g of table sugar, and stir it.
The sugar will dissolve in water.
Then add another 5g of sugar and stir.
This will
also dissolve.
This solution is called an unsaturated solution.
A solution which can
dissolve more amount of a solute at a particular temperature is called an
unsaturated solution.
Continue adding sugar in the above solution.
As the
quantity of sugar in water increases, its dissolution will become more difficult.
A
stage comes when no more sugar will dissolve in water at this temperature.
Any
more sugar added at this stage will settle down at the bottom of the beaker.
This
solution is called a saturated solution at a particular temperature of the process.
A solution in which the maximum amount of the solute has been
dissolved in a particular amount of a solvent at a particular temperature is called
a saturated solution.
Different solutes have different solubilities in a particular solvent.
For
example, if the solutions of table sugar and sodium chloride are prepared, it
is found that 36 g of sodium chloride can dissolvein 100 g of water at 20 C to
give a saturated solution.
Against this 203.9 g of table sugar can dissolve in
water at 20 C to give its saturated solution.
In other words, the solubility of
table sugarin water Is far greater than that of sodium chloride at 20 C.
Thisis
due to the fact that sugar molecules are larger than salt ions, so more water
molecules can surround a single sugar molecule, causing it to dissolve in
largeramounts.
a
I
Mixtures are closely related to our everyday lives.
The air we breathe, the
foods we generally consume, the fluids in our body, the solids like steel we use, are all
either homogeneous or heterogenous mixtures.
1.8 Effect of Temperature on the Solubility of Solutes
The solubility of a solute is the amount of solute which can dissolve in
100g ofa solvent at a particular temperature.
Change in temperature has different effects on the solubility of different
compounds.
Usually the solubility increases with the increase in temperature but
it cannot be taken as a general rule.
There are a large number of compounds
whose solubility in water increases with the increase in temperature e.g.
potassium nitrate (KNQs), silver nitrate (AgNO3) and potassium chloride (KCl) etc.
The solubility of sodium chloride in water does not increase appreciably with the
increase in temperature.
The solubility of compounds like lithium carbonate
(LixCO3) and calcium chromate (CaCrO,) decreases with the increase in
temperature.
The solubility of gases in water also decreases with the increase in
temperature, .
Similarly, the solubilities of copper sulphate and sodium nitrate also
increase with increase in the temperature.
However, the solubility of calcium
hydroxide decreases with the increase in temperature.
Solubility Curves
Solubility Curve of KNO,; in H,O
Oo 120
A
Tr 110
225-
& 100
ra)
6 200-
5 175 =
S
iy)
100 =
75-4
50-—
25-4
O
Supersaturated
Unsaturated
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Temperature C
Saturated
150-
T >
Temperature ( C)
Solubility Curves
Activity
Take 100 g of water in a beaker
and prepare saturated solution of
sugar at room temperature.
Heat the
beaker on a spirit lamp.
Add a
little
more sugar in it and stir it.
Will this
Saturated
solution of
Sugar
sugar be dissolved in it?
You will
notice that by heating the solution
the quantity of sugar dissolved in
water has increased i.e. the solubility
of sugar has increased.
How variation of solubility at different temperatures can be useful for us?
Interesting Information! \
1.
Theincrease in the solubility of solidsin liquids tyneyae
with increase in temperature may be used to
purify them.
Pure solids commonly appear as
beautifully shaped crystals.
Crystals of Potassium Nitrate
Generally the solubility of gases decreases with increase in temperature.
Carbon
dioxide gas is more soluble in water at low temperature.
Soda water bottles are
thus stored in the refrigerator to keep carbon dioxide gas dissolved in water fora
longer period of time.
Chemistry is that branch of science which deals with the composition of matter,
changes in matter and the laws which govern these changes.
To understand the vast and complex subject of Chemistry, it is divided into many
branches.
Physical chemistry, inorganic chemistry and organic chemistry are its main
branches among so many others.
Matter exists mainly in three states: solid, liquid and gas.
They are different from each
other due to different distances between the particles which they contain.
Plasma is regarded as the fourth state of matter which is not normally observed in this
world.
Most of the matter presentin the rest of the universe exists in this state.
Matter also exists in the intermediete states which are at the borderline of its two
principal states, between liquid and gas or between liquid and solid.
Supercritical
fluids and liquid crystals are some examples ofsuch states.
Matter exists in the form of distinct entites called elements, compounds and mixtures.
Elements, compounds and mixtures have distinct properties individually and they are
very different form one another.
Solutions, suspensions and colloidal solutions are different forms in which the
mixtures usually exist.
They have their own characteristic properties.
Different solutes have different solubilities in a particular solvent.
The solubility of a solute is the amount of solute which can dissolve in 100g of a
solvent at a particular temperature.
11.
Change in temperature has different effects on the solubility of different compounds.
‘Exercise Wap}
off]
‘Tick (v) the correct answer.
(i)
Matter is present in neon signs in the state of:
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(a)
Supercritical fluid
(b)
Plasma
(c)
Gas
(d)
Liquid crystal
Hazardous effects of shopping bags are studied in:
(a)
Geochemistry
(6b)
Inorganic Chemistry
(c)
Analytical Chemistry
(d)
Environmental Chemistry
| Theman-made polymer is:
(a)
Starch
(b)
Polystyrene
(c)
Protein
(d)
Cellulose
| Thecrystals of which substance has rhombic shape?
(a)
Brass
(6b) Sulphur
(c)
Graphite
(d) Bronze
= Which liquid amongthe following is a colloidal solution?
(a)
Milk
(c) Vinegar solution
(vi)
(b)
Slaked lime used for white wash
(d)
Mixture
of AgCl in water
| Which ofthe following is a heterogeneous mixture?
(a) Asolution of calcium hydroxide in water
(vii)
(b)
Asolution of potassium nitrate in water
(c)
Hotchocolate
(d)
Concrete mixture
A state of matter whose properties are between those of liquids and
crystalline solids:
(vill)
(a)
Liquid crystal
(b)
Supercritical fluid
(c)
Plasma
(d)
Dark matter
When the tiny visible particles of a substance are dispersed through a
medium, the mixture is named as:
(a)
True solution
(b) Colloid
(c)
Suspension
(d) Saturated solution
(ix)
A solution of KCIO3 has a solubility of about 13.2g per 100 cm’ at 40 C.
How its solubility will be affected, if you decrease the temperature?
(a)
The solubility willincrease
(6)
The solubility
willdecrease
(c)
Thesolubility
will remain the same
(d)
The solubility will first increase with temperature and then it will
decrease
(x)
You are studying the rate of hydrolysis of starch under different
conditions of temperature.
In which branch of chemistry this topic will
fall?
(a) Organic Chemistry
(b) Analytical Chemistry
(c) Biochemistry
(d) Physical Chemistry
Questions for Short Answers
Why is there a need to divide Chemistry into many branches?
Give three
reasons.
Reactions may take place due to electrons present outside the nucleus or
they may take place inside the nucleus.
Which branches of Chemistry cover
these two types of reactions?
What types of problems are solved in analytical chemistry?
Both graphite and graphene have hexagonal layered structures.
What is the
difference?
Why are supercritical fluids important?
Vi.
In which state does matter exist in the Sun?
Vil.
What is the importance of graphene?
Vill.
Which form of matter do most ofthe material things in this world belong to?
Constructed Response Questions
How does a supercritical state look like?
In what way is plasma created in a fluorescent tube?
Most of the molecules we study in biochemistry are organic in nature.
Where
does the difference exist in organic and biochemistry branches of Chemistry?
Give the reason of brilliance shown by diamond.
Can you improve it?
Explain the dissolution of sodium chloride in water.
Vi.
Why do different compounds have different solubilities in water at a
particular temperature?
Vil.
Why NaCl can not be crystallized from water just like KNO3?
vill.
Why graphite is slippery to touch?
Which property of graphite enables it to
be used as lubricant?
Descriptive Questions
Mention the name ofthe branch of Chemistry in which you will study each of
the following topics.
(a) Rate of areaction
(b) Digestion of food in human body
(c) Properties of plasma
(d) Ecosystem
(e) Reactions taking place during fireworks
(f) Measurement ofthe absorption of wavelength with the help of ultraviolet
spectrometer
What are allotropic forms?
Explain the allotropic forms of carbon and
sulphur.
How does coal differ from diamond?
What are supercritical fluids.
How are they different from ordinary liquids?
Define solubility of a solute.
How does the solubility of solutes change with
the increase in temperature?
What types of movements are present in gaseous and liquid molecules?
Differentiate between the areas which are studied under inorganic and
organic chemistry.
Investigative Questions
Preparation of solutions leads to an important process in chemistry which
enables us to purify a compound through crystallization.
Describe a process
in which potassium nitrate is purified by crystallizing it in water.
Graphene is called a miracle material and it is the material of the future.
Which of its many properties makes it very useful in electronics?
