8.4       Electric  current  or  motion  of  electrons  produce  magnetic  field.  Is  the  
          reverse  process  true,  that  is  the  magnetic  field  gives  rise  to  electric  
          current? If yes, give an example and describe it briefly.  

8.5       Four similar solenoids are placed in a circle  
          as shown in the figure. The magnitude of  
                                                                                         D  
          current in all of them should be the same.  
          Show by diagram, the direction of current in  
                                                                                                        C  
          each  solenoid  such  that  when  current  in  
          anyone solenoid is switched OFF, the net                             A             O  

          magnetic field at the centre O is  directed  
          towards that solenoid. Explain your answer.  
                                                                                                 B  
  
  

 D      Comprehensive Questions  

8.1       How  can  you  identify  whether  an  object  is  a  magnet  or  a  magnetic  
          material?  
8.2       Describe the strength of a magnetic field in terms of magnetic lines of  
          force. Explain it by drawing a few diagrams for the fields as examples.  
8.3       What is a circuit breaker? Describe its working with the help of a diagram.  
8.4       A magnet attracts only a magnet. Explain the statement.  
8.5       Differentiate  between  paramagnetic,  diamagnetic  and  ferromagnetic  
          materials with reference to the domain theory.  
8.6       Why ferromagnetic materials are suitable for making magnets?  

                                                      180  
  
﻿    Chapter  
          9                 Nature of Science  

  
  Student Learning Outcomes  

After completing this chapter, students will be able to:  

   [SLO: P-09-G-01]  Describe physics as the study of matter, energy, space, time and their  

   mutual connections and interactions  

   [SLO: P-09-G-02]  Explain with examples that physics has many sub-fields, and in today's  

   world involves interdisciplinary fields. (Students should be able to distinguish in terms of the  

   broad subject matter that is studied between the fields:  

           Biophysics  

          Astronomy  

          Astrophysics  

           Cosmology  

          Thermal Physics  

           Optics  

           Classical Mechanics  

           Quantum Mechanics  

           Relativistic Mechanics  

           Nuclear Physics  

           Particle Physics  

           Electromagnetism  

          Acoustics  

           Computational Physics  

           Geophysics  

           Climate Physics)  

   [SLO: P-09-G-03] Explain with examples how Physics is a subset of the Physical Sciences and  

   of the natural sciences  

   [SLO:  P-09-G-04]  Brief  with  examples  that  science  is  a  collaborative  field  that  requires  

   interdisciplinary researchers working together to share knowledge and critique ideas  

   [SLO: P-09-G-05] Understand the terms 'hypothesis', 'theory' and 'law' in the context of  

   research in the physics  

   [SLO: P-09-G-06] Explain, with examples in Physics, falsifiability as the idea that a theory is  

   scientific only if it makes assertions that can be disproven  

   [SLO:  P-09-G-07]  Differentiate  the  terms  'science',  'technology'  and  'engineering'  with  

   suitable examples  

                                                        181  
  
﻿Science is a collective knowledge about the natural phenomena, processes and  
events occurring around us. The process starts with asking a question, how and  
why the things in the world behave as such. We try to look orderliness and  
regularities among various phenomena apparently of diverse nature. Such study  
of nature gave birth to a single discipline, known as Natural Philosophy now  
known as science. There was a tremendous increase in the volume of scientific  
knowledge at the beginning of nineteenth century. That made it necessary to  
classify the study of nature basically into two main disciplines.  
(i.)      The biological sciences which deal with the living things.  
(ii.)    The physical sciences which are about the study of non-living things.  
           Physics  is  important  and  basic  part  of  physical  sciences  beside  other  
disciplines such as chemistry and geology.  

  

9.1 Scope of Physics  
                                                                                         Do You Know?  
           Physics  is  the  fundamental  science  that  deals   
with  the  constituents  of  the  universe,  that  is,  matter,   
energy, space, time and their  mutual  relationships and   
                                                                                          
interactions. It strives to understand how the universe  
                                                                                          
works,  from  the  smallest  subatomic  particles  to  the   
largest star and galaxies. We have studied some of the  
                                                                                          
basic  properties  of  matter,  energy  and  their  mutual   This  toy  which  worked  
inter-relationship in the earlier chapters of this book.   by  steam  invented  by  
We will discuss in detail the concept of space and time in   Hero, from Alexandria in  
                                                                                          t h e   3 r d   c e n t u r y .  
the  higher  classes.  Briefly,  the  space  is  the  three-  
                                                                                          However, the people did  
dimensional  extent  in  which  all  objects  and  events                                 not think of using such  
occur.  It  provides  framework  to  define  positions  and   things   for   luxury   and  
motions of various objects under some force.                                              comfort in those days.  

           The time measures the sequence and durations of events. It is considered  
fourth dimension. For example, oscillating motion such as that of a swinging  
pendulum relies on the time interval that determine frequency of oscillations.  
Another  example  is  the  time  dilation  which  is  a  phenomenon  discussed  by  
special theory of relativity where time passes slowly for an observer moving at  
ultra-high speed compared to one relatively at rest. Physics explores how these  
fundamental concepts are inter connected. For example, the theory of relativity  
explains how space and time are not absolute quantities but are related to each  
other. It describes the relationship between space and time and how they are  
influenced  by  gravity  and  speed,  for  example,  the  bending  of  light  around  

                                                            182  
  
﻿massive objects like stars. Another branch of physics, the quantum mechanic,  
explains the behavior of particles at the atomic and subatomic levels. It is how the  
physics has applied its principles to wide variety of phenomena, from everyday  
occurrences such as related to  motion and heat to the extreme conditions found  
in the universe.  

  

9.2 Branches of Physics  

            Due to expanding scope of research in Physics, it is usually divided into  
following branches?  

1.          Mechanics:  It is a study of motion and the  
physical  effects  which  influence  motion.  It  is  
based  on   Newton's  laws  of   motion  and  
gravitation and is often called classical mechanics.  

  
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                        Gears in a mechanical system  
  
                                              2.          Heat and thermodynamics:  It deal with the  
                                              thermal energy possessed by the materials and it is  
                                              used when it flows from one body to another.  
  
  
  

  
         Heat engine  

3.          Acoustics:  It  deals  with  the  nature  and  
physical aspects of audible sound energy.  
  

  
                                                                                                  Pressure horn  

                                                

                                                4.          Optics: It deal with the physical aspects of  
                                                visible light.  

                                               
         Dispertion of light  

                                                                 183  
  
﻿5.          Electromagnetism:  It  is  the  study  of  
electromagnetic   phenomenon   and   mutual  
relationship   between   electric   current   and  
magnetic field.  
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                        Electric current is produced in a  
                                                                                        coil rotated in a magnetic field  

  
                                                                                       
6.          Quantum  Mechanics:  It explains the                                       
behavior   of   particles   at   the   atomic   and                                    
subatomic level.                                                                       
                                                                                       
  
  
                                                                                       
                                                                                             Excited states of atom  
  
                                                       7.          Relativistic  Mechanics:  It explains how  
                                                       space and time are not absolute quantities but  
  
                                                        related to observer. It describes the relationship  
  
                                                        between them and  how they are influenced  by  
  
                                                       gravity and speed.  
       Einstein view of gravity  
       as space time curvature  

  
8.          Nuclear  Physics:  It  is  the  study  of  the  
properties of nuclei of the atoms.  
  

  
                                                                                                    Nuclear atom  
  
                                                   9.          Particle   Physics:   It  is  the   study  of  
                                                   subatomic   particles   and   elementary   particles  
                                                   which are basic building blocks of matter.  
  
  
        Quark Structure  
          of a Neutron  
  

10.         Astronomy:   It  is  study  of   
distribution   of   celestial   bodies   like   
                                                                      
planets, stars and galaxies.  
                                                                      
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                         Extended Universe  
                                                                         
                                                                  184  
  
﻿                                                                11.       Cosmology:   It  explores  the  
                                                                large structure and evolution of the  
                                                                universe.  
  
  
  

  
                                                             
           Study of exploring universe                                 
                                                                       
12.        Solid State Physics:  It is the study of   
some  specific  properties  of  matter  in  solid  
form.                                                                  
                                                                            Electrical bonding of solids  
  

9.43 Interdisciplinary Nature of Physics  
                                                                                             

           It refers to integration and interaction of Physics with various other fields  
of  study.  Physics,  being  fundamental  science,  provides  essential  principles,  
techniques and methods that are applicable across a wide range of disciplines.  
Some of these are:  

1.         Biophysics:   Some  biological  systems  and  
processes         are     described         using      the     principles        and  
technique of physics under this field of Study. Examples  
include  the  mechanics  of  biological  structures,  physical  
properties of cells, tissues and organs.                                                                     DNA  
                                                                                                          Structure  
2.         Medical   Physics:   It   applies   physical   
p r i n c i p l e s t o d e v e l o p t e c h n i q u e s a n d   
technologies for  health diagnosis and treatment.   
                                                                             
The examples include imaging techniques, such as   
X-rays;  ultra  sound,  MRI  and  CT  scan  and  also   
radiation therapy for cancer treatment.                                      
                                                                               Magnetic Resonance Imaging  
                                                                                               (MRI)  
                                                   3.         Astrophysics:              It  deals  with   the  
  
                                                    physical properties and processes of celestial  
                                                    bodies  and  phenomena.  For  example,  the  
                                                   interaction between the matter and energy in  

                                                   space to understand the universe as a whole.  
        Study of celestial bodies  

                                                          185  
  
﻿  
                                                       4.         Geophysics:  It applies physical principle  
                                                       to the study of internal structure of the Earth, its  
                                                       magnetic           and      gravitational            fields,      seismic  
                                                       activity (earthquake), volcanoes, etc.  

  
                                                 
 Internal structure of the Earth                                                   
  

5.          Climate  Physics:  It includes the study of  
physical process in the environment, including  
atmospheric   dynamics,   climate   change   and  
weather conditions.  

                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                   A tornado  
  

  
                                                                 6.         Computation Physics: It is about  
                                                                 the use of computational techniques and  
  
                                                                 methods           to     solve       complex          physical  
  
              Computer graphics                                  problems.  

  

9.4 Interdisciplinary Research  
                                                                            

            Collaboration  and  interdisciplinary  nature  of  science  is  essential  for  
addressing the complex issues and challenges of today. By working together and  
sharing  knowledge,  scientist  can  achieve  more  significant  breakthrough  and  
contribute to a deeper understanding of the natural and physical world around  
us.   It   allows   us   to   contribute   to   advance   in   technology,   healthcare,  
environmental  issues  and  many  other  areas.  We  need  collaborated  efforts  
because:  
(I).      Solution of complex issues requires multifacet expertise  
            Many challenging issues, such as climate change, disease prevention and  
treatment, sustainable energy solution are of diverse nature. It is difficult for one  
discipline to address them adequately. Such as understanding and mitigating  
climate  change  require  knowledge  for  meteorology,  oceanography,  physics,  
chemistry,  biological  and  environmental  sciences.  Similarly,  the  health  care  
issues  such  as  recent  Covid  epidemic  involved  combined  efforts  of  expertise  

                                                                186  
  
﻿from  biology,  chemistry,  physics,  medical  technologies  and  data  science  to  
combat this challenge.  
(ii).    Interdisciplinary approaches foster innovation  
         Combined different perspectives and methodologies evolve innovation  
or  out  of  box  solutions.  This  approach  can  lead  to  novel  insight  and  
breakthroughs that might not emerge working in isolation. For example, nano-  
technology is a blend of physics, chemistry, material science and engineering to  
create  materials  and  devices  at  the  nano-scale  with  unique  applications  in  
medical, energy and electronics.  In an other field of  “artificial  intelligence” the  
development involves computer science, mathematical logic, neuroscience etc.  
The collaboration across these fields enhanced the development of intelligence  
systems and their applications.  
(iii).   Rapid sharing of knowledge and information across the globe  
         Sharing and collaboration of knowledge across the globe brings rapid  
advances in science. The online internet information exchanges, conferences  
and workshops provide platforms bringing together researchers from different  
fields   to   share   their   fresh   findings,   discussion   and   brainstorming   new  
approaches.  Collaborated  research  projects  and  research  journals  are  also  
means of collaborate research.  
          Interdisciplinary  research  and  collaboration  leads  to  a  more  holistic  
understanding of challenging issues by interacting with different perspectives  
such as that of environment and space exploration.  

  

9.5 Scientific Method  

         Scientific method is a systematic approach used to search for truth of an  
issue and problem solving regarding natural and physical world. It is based on  
the following steps.  
1.        Identify or recognize an issue or a problem.  
2.       Gather information through observations of its various aspects.  
3.        Propose an explanation or a guess work known as hypothesis.  
4.        Perform experiment or collect evidences to test the hypothesis.  
5.        Record, organize and analyze gathered data, plotting and interpreting  
         graphs to reach at a conclusion which is called a theory.  
6.        Repeated tests of the theory to wide range of similar issues then lead  
         towards the formulation of a law.  
Some key steps are elaborated here.  

                                                    187  
  
﻿1. Observation  
                                           
              The first step in scientific method is  
to make observations of natural processes  
and  to  collect  the  data  about  them.  This  
m a y b e d o n e  e i t h e r  b y  o r d i n a r y  
observations  or  by  obtaining  the  results  
from different experiments.  For example, it  
is our common observation that shadow of  
an  opaque  object  is  formed  when  it  is  
placed in the path of light coming from the                                                                                                                     
Sun or a lamp (Fig.9.1).                                                                                                Fig. 9.1  

  

2. Hypothesis  

              On  the   basis  of  the   data  collected  through   observations   or  
experimentation, we can develop a hypothesis. This is done in order to test its  
logical results, i.e., it is assumed that nature will act in a particular way under  
certain  specific  circumstances.  From  the  above  example,  we  assume  that  
shadows of opaque  objects are formed when they come in the path of light  
because light travels in a straight line.  

  

3. Experiment  

              Experiment is an organized repeatable process which is used to test the  
truth of a hypothesis.  
              To verify the assumption made in the above example, four card boards,  

                                                                                                                                        st  
each with a hole, are placed in a straight line, such that the hole in  1  card  is in  
front of a torch. When we see through the hole in cards, we can see the light of  
the torch (Fig. 9.2-a). If any of these cards is displaced, we cannot see light  
passing through  (Fig. 9.2-b). Thus, this experiment proves that light travels in a  
straight line.  
  

  
                 Fig. 9.2 (a)  
  
                 
                 
                 

                 
               Fig. 9.2 (b)  

                                                                             188  

  
﻿4.Theory  
                                                                                              Observation  
                                                                                                                
             A f t e r  t h e  s u c c e s s f u l   
                                                                                                                
verification   of  an  assumption  and   
                                                                                                                
w  i t  h  t  h  e  h  e  l  p  o f  c  a  r  e f  u  l                                        Hypothesis  
                                                                                                                
                                                                       
experimentation, it becomes a theory  
                                                                                                                
                                                                       
a n d i s a p p l i c a b l e  t o  s i m i l a r                                                               
                                                                                              Experiment  
phenomena.  With  the  help  of  the                                        Lack of                             
above  experiment,  the  assumption                                      agreement                              
                                                                                                                
has been proved that light travels in a   
                                                                                                   Theory   
straight  line.  So  it  then  becomes  a  
                                                                                                                
                                                                       
theory.                                                                                                         
             It is a logical explanation of the                                                 Prediction   
causes and effects of an issue or an                                                                                          Negative  
                                                                               Positive  
event that  occurs in nature.                                                                                                    result  
                                                                                 result  

  

                                                                                                       Law  
                                                                                                                             
5. Prediction  
                                  

             After  the  careful  analysis  of  a  theory  we  can  make  predictions  about  
certain unknown aspects of nature. To verify the prediction, experiments are  
designed to test the theory over and over again. If test result do not agree,  
hypothesis is changed or rejected.  
  
  

  
6. Falsifiability                                                                                       For Your Information!  
                                                                                                         
             It is a concept introduced that suggests a theory   
to be considered scientific if it also make predictions   
that  can  be  tested  and  potentially  proven  false.  The   
requirement of falsifiability ensures that theories are not                                                            th  
                                                                                                         In the  20      century, Albert  
based on vague, non-specific or untestable claims. It   Einstein                                                         declared         that  
distinguishes scientific theories from false or  pretended   mass and energy, the two  
beliefs that cannot be experimentally tested.                                                            concerns  of  Physics,  are  
                                                                                                         forms of  each other. His  
                                                                                                         theory of relativity altered  
                                                                                                         m a n ’ s v i e w s  o f  t h e  
                                                                                                         universe.  

                                                                      189  
﻿7. Law  
               

         When a theory has been tested many times and generally accepted as  
true, it is called a law. The law is such a statement regarding the behaviour of  
nature which explains the observations and experiments of the past and can  
predict about other aspects of nature. From the fact that light travels in a straight  
line, we can predict that shadow of an opaque object, similar in shape, is formed  
whenever it is placed in the path of light. For example, the shadow of a ball will be  
round whereas the shadow of a rectangular block will be a rectangle After testing  
the theory under different situations, this becomes a law of science that light  
travels in a straight line.  
         The theories or laws of physics are man made ideas about the way the  
things work. They are liable to be disproved or modified with the future advances  
in  science  which  brings  fresh  facts  and  new  insights  about  the  natural  and  
physical world.  

  

9.6 Scientific Base of Technologies and Engineering  

         Science or to be more specific, physics plays a vital role being the core of  
each invention based on physical laws and principles. Technology  refers to the  
methods and techniques developed by using scientific  knowledge.  It  may be a  
machine technology or a software programme of information technology. For  
example,  
     (i)  Automobile   technology   is   based  on  the   principles  of  the  
         thermodynamics.  
     (ii)  Radar technology is based on the detection and reflection principles of  
         electromagnetic waves.  
     (iii) Laser technology is based on the principles of atomic physics. It is widely  
         used     in   medical     diagnosis      and     treatment,      metallurgy,      industry,  
         telecommunication and  space exploration.  
         Engineering is the process of applying various technologies and scientific  
principles to design various instruments, tools and build things that help to meet  
specific  needs  in  every  walk  of  life.  Engineers  also  consider  factors  like  cost  
effectiveness and safety  measures when designing various  products.  Examples  
include:  
     (I)  A  civil  engineer  designs  a  bridge  that  can  withstand  strong  winds,  
         earthquakes, intense weather conditions and heavy traffic.  

                                                 190  
                                                  8  
﻿     (ii)  A software engineer designs a user friendly application of a smartphone.  
     (iii) An  aviation  engineer  looks  for  lighter  material  which  can  withstand  
          sudden and severe disturbances and extreme weather conditions during  
         the flight of an  aeroplane.  
         Though the science, technology and engineering fields seem distinct but  
they often work together. Scientific discoveries lead to new technologies and  
engineers rely on scientific knowledge for our benefits and comforts. They are  
the  potent  for  change  in  the  outlook  of  mankind  in  shaping  life  style  and  
influencing our way of thinking.  

  
                                              KEY POINTS  

     Science is a collective knowledge about the natural phenomena and events.  

     Physics is the fundamental branch of science which deals with matter, energy, space, time  

      and their mutual relationships.  

     There are many sub fields of physics called its branches such as mechanics, heat, optics,  

      electromagnetism, etc.  

     Interdisciplinary nature of physics refers to integration and interaction of physics with  

      other  disciplines  of  science.  Some  of  them  are  biophysics  astrophysics,  geophysics,  

      climate physics and computational physics.  

     Scientific method is a specific and systematic approach for the search of the truth about a  

      natural phenomenon or event. Its steps include observation, hypothesis, experiment,  

      theory, prediction and law.  

     The  advancement  in  the  science  knowledge  and  its  applications  through  various  

      technologies and engineering has changed the outlook of mankind and have made our  

      lives easier and comfortable.  

  

  

                                                EXERCISE  

 A      Multiple Choice Questions  

         Tick () the correct answer.  

9.1       Physics is a branch of:  

          (a) Social science                              (b) Life science  

          (c) Physical science                            (d) Biological science  

9.2      Which branch of science plays vital role in technology and engineering?  

          (a) Biology        (b) Chemistry                (c) Geology                (d) Physics  

                                                     191  
                                                      8  
﻿9.3      Automobile technology is based on:  

         (a) acoustics                                         (b) electromagnetism  

         (c) optics                                            (d) thermodynamics  

9.4      A user friendly software application of smart phone use:  

         (a) laser technology                                  (b) information technology  

         (c) medical technology                                (d) electronic technology  

9.5      The working of refrigeration and air conditioning involves:  

         (a) electromagnetism                                  (b) mechanics  

         (c) climate science                                   (d) thermodynamics  

9.6      What is the ultimate truth of a scientific method?  

         (a) Hypothesis                                        (b) Experimentation  

         (c) Theory                                            (d) Law  

9.7       The statement “If I do not study for this test, then I will not get good  

         grade” is an example of:  

         (a) theory                                            (b) observation  

         (c) prediction                                        (d) law  

9.8      Which of the following are methods of investigation?  

         (a) Observation                                       (b) Experimentation  

         (c) Research                                          (d) All of these  

9.9      A hypothesis:  

         (a) may or may not be testable                        (b) is supported by evidence  

         (c) is a possible answer to a question                (d) all of these  

9.10.   A graph of an organized data is an example of:  

         (a) collecting data                                   (b) forming a hypothesis  

         (c) asking question                                   (d) analyzing data  

9.11.   The colour of a door is brown. It is an example of:  

         (a) observation                                       (b) hypothesis  

         (c) prediction                                        (d) law  

                                                  192  
  
﻿  B     Short Answer Questions  
                                                           
9.1       State in your own words, what is science? Write its two main groups.  
9.2       What is physics all about? Name some of its branches.  
9.3       What is meant by interdisciplinary fields? Give a few examples.  
9.4       List the main steps of scientific method.  
9.5       What is a hypothesis? Give an example.  
9.6       Distinguish between a theory and a law of physics.  
9.7       What is the basis of laser technology?  
9.8       What is falsifiabilty concept? How is it important?  

  

 C      Constructed Response Questions  

9.1       Is the theory of science an ultimate truth? Describe briefly.  
9.2       Do you think that the existing laws of nature may need a change in future?  
          Describe briefly.  
9.3       Describe three jobs that need the use of scientific knowledge.  
9.4       Describe when a theory is rejected or need its modification.  
9.5       Comment on the statement. “ A theory is capable of being proved right  
          but not being proved wrong is not a scientific theory”.  
9.6       What  has  been  the  general  reaction  to  new  ideas  about  established  
          truths?  
9.7       If a hypothesis is not testable, is the hypothesis wrong? Explain.  
9.8       Explain how a small amount of data cannot prove that a prediction is  
          always correct but can prove it is not always correct.  
9.9       What is the relationship between an experiment and a hypothesis?  
9.10      Describe why the solution of complex problems need interdisciplinary  
          research and collaboration.  
  

 D      Comprehensive Questions  

9.1       Describe the scope of physics. What are the main branches of physics?  
          State briefly.  
9.2       What is meant by interdisciplinary fields of physics? Give three examples.  
9.3       What is scientific method? Describe its main steps with examples.  
9.4       Differentiate  the  terms,  science,  technology  and  engineering  with  
          examples.  
9.5       What is the scope of physics in everyday life? Give some examples.  

                                                       193  
  
