   Chapter  
         3                     Dynamics  

  
Student Learning Outcomes  
                                                

 After completing this chapter, students will be able to:  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -17]  Illustrate that mass is a measure of the quantity of matter in an object  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -18] Explain that the mass of an object resists change from its state of rest or  
 motion (inertia)  
 [SLO:  P  -09  -  B  -19]  Describe  universal  gravitation  and  gravity.  State  Newton's  Law  of  
 gravitation. (Include problems related to gravitation.)  
 [SLO: P -09 -  B -20]  Define and calculate weight [Weight is the force exerted on an object  
 having mass by a planet's gravity, and use w = mg]  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -21]  Define and calculate gravitational field strength [This includes being able  
 to state that a gravitational field is a region in which a mass experiences a force due to  
 gravitational attraction. Students should  be able to define gravitational field strength (g) as  
 force per unit mass use the equation gravitational field strength = weight/mass g = w /m (and  
 know that this is equivalent to the acceleration of free fall)]  
 [SLO: P -09  -  B -22] Justify and illustrate the use of mechanical and electronic balances to  
 measure mass [understanding the internal workings of the electronic balance is not required;  
just  how to practically use the instrument in appropriate situations]  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -23] Justify and illustrate the use of a force meter (spring balance) to measure  
 weight.  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -24] Differentiate between contact and noncontact forces  
 [SLO:  P  -09  -  B  -25]  Differentiate  between  different  types  of  forces  [including  weight  
 (gravitational force), friction, drag, air resistance, tension (elastic force), electrostatic force,  
 magnetic force, thrust (driving force), and contact force]  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -26] State that there are four fundamental forces and describe them in terms  
 of their relative strengths [These are the gravitational, electromagnetic, strong and weak  
 nuclear forces. Students should know that Pakistani Scientist won the Nobel Prize for helping  
 prove that the weak force and the electromagnetic force are actually unified]  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -27] Represent the forces acting on a body using free body diagrams  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -28] State and apply Newton's first law  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -29] Identify the effect of force on velocity [It may change the velocity of an  
 object by changing its direction of motion or its speed]  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -30] Determine the resultant of two or more forces acting in the same plane.  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -31] State and apply Newton's second law in terms of acceleration  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -32] State and apply Newton's third law  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -33] Explain with examples how Newton's third law describes pairs of forces of  
 the same type acting on different objects  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -34] State the limitations of Newton's laws of motion  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -36] Analyse the dissipative effect of friction  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -37] Analyse the dynamics of an object reaching terminal velocity  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -38] Differentiate qualitatively between rolling and sliding friction  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -39] Justify methods to reduce friction.  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -40] Define and calculate momentum  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -41] Define and calculate impulse [Use the equation Impulse= F Δ t = m Δ V ]  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -42] Apply the principle of the conservation of momentum to solve simple  
 problems in one dimension  
 [SLO: P -09 - B -43] Define resultant force in terms of momentum.  

                                                        52  
  
﻿                 In kinematics, we studied the motion of objects. If the position, velocity  
and acceleration were known at any time, then the position and velocity of the  
moving body at another time could be completely described. But one of the  
things left out of this discussion was the cause of acceleration produced in the  
body.  If  a  stone  is  dropped  from  a  height,  it  is  accelerated  downward.  It  is  
because the Earth exerts a force of gravity on the stone that pulls it down. When  
we  drive  a  car  or  motorcycle,  the  engine  exerts  a  force  which  produces  
acceleration. We will observe that whenever there is acceleration, there is always  
a force present to cause that acceleration. Dynamics is concerned with the forces  
that produce change in the motions of bodies.  

  

3.1 Concept of Force  

  

                                                                                                                                 

                 A common concept of a force  is a  push or a  
pull that starts, stops or changes the magnitude and  
direction of velocity of a body. We come across many  
forces in our daily life. Some of them we apply on  
other  bodies  and  some  are  acting  on  us.  For  
example, when we open a door, we push or pull it by  
applying force. When we are sitting in a car, we push  
against the seat as the car turns round a corner.  
                 Force transfers energy to an object. Take the                                                                                                                                    
example of a man who moves a wheelbarrow with its                                                                                                        Fig. 3.1  

load. The man first applies force to lift it and then applies force to push it (Fig.3.1).  
He  applies  a  different  amount  of  force  on  each  handle  when  turning  the  
wheelbarrow  around  the  corner  in  order  to  keep  it  from  tipping  over.  The  
examples of forces acting on us are the force of gravity acting downward, the  
force of friction which helps us to walk on the ground and many others.  

  

  Types of Forces  

There are two major types of forces:  
                 1. Contact Forces                                                                  2. Non-contact Forces  

    1. Contact Forces  

                 A contact force is a force that is exerted by one object on the other at the  
point of contact. Applied forces (push a pull and twist) are contact forces. Some  
other examples of contact forces are the following:  
(i)  Friction  
                 It is the force that resists motion when the surface of one object comes in  
contact with the surface of another.  

                                                                                              53  
  
﻿(ii)  Drag  
         The drag force is the resistant force caused by the motion of a body  
through a fluid. It acts opposite to the relative motion of any object moving with  
respect to surrounding fluid.  
(iii) Thrust  
          It is an upward force exerted by a liquid on an object immersed in it. When  
we try to immerse an object in water, we feel an upward force exerted on the  
object. This force increases as we push the object deeper into the water. A ship  
can float in the sea due to this force which balances the weight of the ship.  
(iv)  Normal Force  
           It is the force of reaction exerted by the surface on an object lying on it.  
This force acts outward and perpendicular to the surface. It is also called the  
support force upon the object.  
(v)  Air Resistance  
       It is the resistance (opposition) offered by air when an object falls through it.  
(vi)   Tension Force  
          It is the force experienced by a rope when a person or load pulls it.  
(vii)  Elastic Force  
          It is a force that brings certain materials back to their original shape after  
being deformed. Examples are rubber bands, springs, trampoline, etc.  
   2. Non-contact Forces  
         A non-contact force is defined as the force between two objects which are  
not in physical contact. The non-contact forces can work from a distance. That is  
why, these are sometimes called as action-at-a-distance. There is always a field  
linked with a non-contact force. Due to this property, non-contact forces are also  
called field forces. A few examples of non-contact forces are described below:  

(i)   Gravitational Force  
         An  apple  falling  down  from  a  tree  is  one  of  the  best  examples  of  
gravitational  force  (Fig.  3.2).  When  we  throw  an  object  upward,  it  is  the  
gravitational force of the Earth that brings it back to the  
Earth. In fact, the gravitational force is an attractive force  
that  exists  among  all  bodies  which  have  mass.  It  is  a  
long-range force given by Newton's law of gravitation:  
                  F = G  m m1    2    where m        and  m      are two  

                              2                   1            2  
                             r  
masses distant r apart and G is constant of gravitation. Its value   

                – 11    2    –2 
is 6.67  × 10      N m  kg  . The Sun's gravitational force keeps the  
                                                                                       
Earth and all other  planets of our solar system in fixed orbits.                         Fig. 3.2  
Similarly, the gravitational force of the Earth keeps the moon in its orbit. It also  
keeps the atmosphere and oceans fixed to the surface of the Earth. Even an  
object resting on a surface exerts a downward force called its weight due to  
attractive force of the Earth also known as gravity.  

                                                     54  
  
﻿(ii)  Electrostatic Force                                                      
          An electrostatic force acts between two charged   
                                                                               
objects. The opposite charges attract each other and  
                                                                               
similar charges repel each other as shown in Fig. 3.3.   Force                                          Force  
Like  gravitational  force,  electrostatic  force  is  also  a   
long-range force.                                                              
                                                                               
(iii)  Magnetic Force  
          It  is  a  force  which  a  magnet  exerts  on  other   
                                                                                         Fig. 3.3  
magnets  and  magnetic  materials  like  iron,  nickel  and  
cobalt.  You  might  have  observed                   that   iron  pins  
attracted  in  the  presence  of  a  magnet  without  any  
physical contact (Fig. 3.4). Magnetic force between the  
poles  of  two  magnets  can  be  either  attractive  or  
repulsive. This can be observed very easily by bringing  
different poles of two magnets close to each other. Like  
poles repel and unlike poles attract each other.                                         Fig. 3.4  

(iv)  Strong and Weak Nuclear Forces  
          These  are  also  non-contact  forces  acting  between  the  subatomic  
particles. We will study these forces in the next section.  

3.2 Fundamental Forces  
There are four fundamental forces in nature. These are:  
    1.    Gravitational force                   2.        Electromagnetic force  
    3.    Strong nuclear force                  4.        Weak nuclear force  
Every force comes under any of these forces.  

 Gravitational Force  

          The gravitational force has been discussed in the previous section. We  
often talk about this force.   It is the weakest one among all four forces. Being a  
long range force, it extends to infinite distance although it becomes weaker and  
weaker.  
  Electromagnetic  Force  
          It  is  the  force  that  causes  the  interaction   
between  electrically  charged  particles.  Electrostatic   
                                                                            
and magnetic forces come under this category. These  
                                                                            
are long-range forces. The areas in which these forces  
                                                                            
act are called electromagnetic fields. Electromagnetic                                   Fig. 3.5  
forces  are  stronger  than  gravitational  and  weak                            A moving magnet  
                                                                             produces electric current  
                                                      55  
  
﻿nuclear forces. This force causes all chemical reactions. It binds together atoms,  
molecules and crystals etc. At macroscopic level, it is a possible cause of friction  
between different surfaces in relative motion.  

  

 Strong Nuclear Forces  

  

It holds the atomic nuclei together by binding the   
protons  and  neutrons  in the  nucleus  over  coming   
                                                                                     
repulsive electromagnetic force between positively  
                                                                                     
charged protons.  It is also a short-range force with   

                             − 
the   order   of   10 ¹⁴m.   If   the   distance   between   
nucleons  increases  beyond  this  range,  this  force   
ceases to act.                                                                                         Fig. 3.6  
                                                                                            The binding force of  
                                                                                             protons and neutrons  
 Weak Nuclear Force                                                                              in the nucleus  
           Weak nuclear force is responsible for the                                 
                                                                                             Electron  
disintegration  of  a  nucleus.  For  example,  the  
                                                                                 Proton                  Neutron  
weak nuclear force executes the  β-decay (beta                                               
decay)   of   a   neutron,   in   which   a   neutron                                                              Neutrino  
transforms into a proton (Fig.3.7). In the process,                                          
                                                                                             
a β-particle (electron) and an uncharged particle                                            
called antineutrino are emitted. In other words,                                             
we  can  say  that  due  to  weak  nuclear  force                                            
radioactive  decay  of  atoms  occurs.  However,                                           Fig. 3.7  

weak nuclear force is stronger than the gravitational force but weaker than the  

                                                                                                   -17  
electromagnetic force. It is a short-range force of the order 10                                       m.  

  

  Unification of Weak Nuclear and Electromagnetic Forces  

           A Pakistani scientist Dr. Abdus Salam along with Sheldon Glashow and  
Steven  Weinberg  were  awarded  in  1979  Nobel  Prize  in  Physics  for  their  
contributions to the unification of the weak  nuclear force and electromagnetic  
force as electroweak force. Although these two forces appear to be different in  
everyday phenomena, but the theory models them as two different aspects of  
the same force. Its effects are observed for the interactions taking place at very  
high energy.  

                                                              56  
  
﻿  3.3 Forces in a Free- Body Diagram  
                                                                                                
            External forces acting on an object may                                   
include  friction,  gravity,  normal  force,  drag,   Applied force   
tension  in  a  string  or  a  human  force  due  to                                  
                                                                                      
pushing or pulling.                                                                   
            Suppose  a  book  is  pushed  over  the                                   
surface of a table top as shown in Fig.3.8(a).                                        
Then how can we represent the forces acting                                           
on the body using free-body diagram?                                                  

                                                                                      
            Free-body diagrams are used to show                                                       Fig. 3.8 (a)  
the relative magnitudes and directions of all  
the  forces  acting  on  an  object  in  a  given                                     

situation. In other words, a free-body diagram                                                   Normal force  
is a special example of the vector diagrams.  
            Usually, the object is represented by a                                     Friction                 Applied force  
box and the force arrows are drawn outward  
from the centre of the box in the directions of  
forces as shown in Fig.3.8(b). The length of a  
force arrow (line) reflects the magnitude of the                                                     Weight  

force   and   the   arrow   head   indicates   the  
                                                                                                   Fig. 3.8 (b)  
direction in which the force acts. Each force is  
labelled to indicate the exact type of force.  

  

  3.4 Newton’s Laws of Motion  
                                                                                
  

                                                                                                    Do You Know?  
  Newton’s First Law of Motion  
                                                                                             Sir Isaac Newton was born  
            It is our common observation that a force  
                                                                                             in Lincolnshire on January  
is required to move or to stop a body. A book                                                 4, 1643. The name of his  
placed on a table remains there unless a force is                                            famous book is “Principia  
applied to move it (Fig.3.9). A ball rolling on floor                                                Mathematica”.  

should continue to  move with the same velocity  
in the absence of an applied force. But practically,  
we  see  that  it  is  not  true.  The  ball  stops  after  
covering  some  distance.  In  fact,  an  opposing  
force (friction) causes the ball to stop. Newton  
expressed  such  observations  in  his  first  law  of  
motion which states that:  

                                                                 57                                      Fig. 3.9  

  
﻿                     A body continues its state of rest or of uniform motion in a  
                     straight  line  unless  acted  upon  by  some  external  force.  
                                                                                                                                         

When a fast-moving bus stops suddenly, the passengers tend to bend forward. It  
is because they want to continue their motion. On the other hand, when the bus  
starts moving quickly from rest, the passengers are pushed back against the seat.  
This time, the tendency of passengers is to retain their state of rest.  
             According  to  first  law  of  motion,  a  bus  moving  on  the  road  should  
continue its motion without any force exerted by the engine. But practically, we  
see that if the engine stops working, the bus comes to rest after covering some  
distance. It is because of the friction between the tyres of the bus and the road. All  
the bodies moving on the Earth are stopped by the force of friction. If you were in  
outer space and throw an object away where no force is acted upon it, the object  
would continue to move forever with constant velocity.  
             The first law of motion also provides us another definition of force which is  
stated as follows:  

  

                         Force is an agency which changes or tends to change  
                              the state of rest or of uniform motion of a body.  

              In simple words, we can say that force causes acceleration.  

  

Inertia                                                                                                       A Demonstration of  
                                                                                                               Property of Inertia  
  A net force is required to change the velocity of    
objects.  For  instance,  a  net  force  may  cause  a    
bicycle to pick up speed quickly. But when the same    
                                                                                                       
force is applied to a truck, any change in the motion  
                                                                                                       
may not be observed. We say that the truck has    
more inertia than a bicycle. The mass of an object is    
a measure of its inertia. The greater the mass of an    
object, the greater is its inertia.                                                                    
                                                                                                       
  
 The property of a body to maintain its state of rest or                                               
                                                                                                       
  of uniform motion in a straight line is called inertia.     

             As a result of the  role of inertia in  Newton's  
                                                                                                       
first  law,  this  law  is  sometimes  called  as  law  of                                             When the table cloth is pulled  
inertia.                                                                                               abruptly, the objects remain in  
                                                                                                        their original position on the  
                                                                                                                           table.  
                                                                            58  

  
﻿  Newton’s Second Law of Motion  
                                                                          

           Newton's first law indicates that if no net force acts on an object, then the  
velocity  of  the  object  remains  unchanged.  The  second  law  deals  with  the  
acceleration produced in a body when a net force acts upon it. Newton's second  
law can be stated as:  

  

    If  a  net  external  force  acts  upon  a  body,  it  accelerates  the  body  in  the  
    direction of force. The magnitude of acceleration is directly proportional to  
   the magnitude of force and is inversely proportional to the mass of the body.  

           If a net force of magnitude F acts on a body of mass m and produces an  
acceleration of magnitude a, then the second law can be written mathematically  
as:  
                                        and              a  ∝   F  
                                                                   1  
                                                         a  ∝  
                                                                  m  
                                        So                         F  
                                                         a  ∝  
                                                                  m  
                                                                                       F  
                                         or              a     =   (constant)  
                                                                                      m  
  

                                                                         -2 
According to SI units, if  m  =  1 kg,  a  =  1 m s  ,   F  =  1 N,  then the value of the  
constant will be 1. Therefore, the above equation can be written as:  

                                                          F  
                                         a  =   1 ×  
                                                         m  
                                or       F  = m a .............................. (3.1)  

           First law of motion provides the definition of force, i.e., a force produces  
an acceleration in a body. By the second law of motion (F = ma), we can calculate  
mathematically, the amount of force required to produce a certain amount of  
acceleration in a body of  known mass. The SI unit of force is newton (N).  

  

                            One newton is the force which produces an  
                            acceleration of 1 m s– ² in a body of mass 1 kg.  

From Eq 3.1                       1 N  =  1 kg m s-2  

                                                              59  
  
﻿  Effect of Force on Velocity  
                                                        

          Newton’s second law also tells that a force can change the velocity of a  
body  by  producing  acceleration  or  deceleration  in  it.  As  velocity  is  a  vector  
quantity, so the change may be in its magnitude, direction or in both of them.  

  

Newton’s Third Law of Motion  

          Whenever there is an interaction between two  

bodies A and B, such that the body A exerts a force on  
                                                                                 A  
body B, the force is known as action of A on B. In  

response to this action, the body B exerts a force on  

the body A. This force is known as reaction of B on A.  

For example, when we press a spring, the force exerted                            B  

by our hand on the spring is action. Our hand also  

experiences a force exerted by the spring. This is the  

force of reaction (Fig.3.10). Newton expressed these  

action and reaction forces in his third law of motion. It  

is stated as:  
                                                                                            Fig. 3.10  
           For every action, there is always                                      Do You Know?  
           an equal and opposite reaction.                            
                                                                                                         R  
          Since, action and reaction do not act                                   F  
                                                                      
on  the  same  body  but  they  act  on  two     
different  bodies,  so  they  can  never  balance     
each other. Thus, Newton's third law can also     
                                                                      
be expressed as follows:  
                                                                      
 I f one body exerts a force on a second body,                        In   space,   an   astronaut   throws   a  
    the second body also exerts an equal and                          wrench,  as  a  reaction  he  moves  in  
          opposite force on the first body.                           opposite direction.  

 Forces Act in Pairs  
  
          We have study that forces act in pairs when two objects interact, i.e.,  
action  and  reaction  forces.  We  often  notice  a  force  that  seems  to  make  
something happen but usually we do not notice the other force involved.  Here  
are some examples of pairs of forces involved in accordance with Newton's third  
law of motion.  

                                                        60  
  
﻿(I)  Consider a block lying on a table as shown in Fig. 3.11.  
              The force acting downward on the block is the weight. The block exerts a  
downward force  on  the  table  equal  to  its  weight  w.  The  table also  exerts  a  
reaction force F  on the block. The two forces on the block balance each other  
                               n  

and the block remains at rest.  

                                       F 
                                         n  
          
          

                 w  
                                                                                                                           R                F  
          
          
                                       w  
                     F                                                                                       Fig. 3.12  

                       n  

                                  Fig. 3.11  

(ii)  When a bullet is fired from a gun, the bullet moves in the forward direction  
with a force F. This is the force of action. The gun recoils in the backward direction  
with a reaction force R (Fig. 3.12).  

  

3.5 Limitations of Newton’s Laws of Motion  

              We have already explained that Newton's laws of motion can be applied  
with very high degree of accuracy to the motion of objects and velocities which  
we come across in everyday life.  
              The problems arise when we deal with the motion of elementary particles  
having velocities close to that of light. For that purpose, relativistic mechanics  
developed by Albert Einstein is applicable.  
              After all this discussion, we can say that Newton's laws of motion are not  
exact for all types of motion, but provide a good approximation, unless an object  
is small enough or moving close to the speed of light.  

  

                                                                  Mini Exercise  

     Look at the  photographs  below.  Identify the  pairs of forces acting in each  
     photograph.  

                    Fig. 3.13                                         Fig. 3.14                                         Fig. 3.15  

                                                                            61  
  
﻿3.6 Mass and Weight  
                                                              

            Commonly,  we  consider  mass  and  weight  as  the  same  quantities  but  

scientifically, mass and weight are two different quantities. When we say that the  

weight of this object is 5 kg, it is not true. In fact, 5 kg is the mass of the object. The  

simplest definition of  mass is that it is a  measure of the quantity of  matter in a  

body. Scientifically, mass of a body can be defined as:  

  

    The characteristic of a body which determines the magnitude of acceleration  

    produced when a certain force acts upon it is  known as  mass of the  body.  

            Mass is a scalar quantity. It remains the same everywhere. Practically, mass  

is measured by an ordinary balance. The SI unit of mass is kilogram (kg).  

            Weight is a gravitational force acting on the object. It is a vector quantity  

directed downward, towards the centre of the Earth.  

  

                         The weight of an object is equal to the force with  

                         which the Earth attracts the body towards its centre.  

  

   Gravitational Field  

            The gravitational field is a space around a mass in which another mass  

experiences  a  force  due  to  gravitational  attraction.  The  gravitational  field  

strength is defined as the gravitational force acting on unit mass. Thus, mass m  

on the surface of the Earth exerts a force known as its weight w given by w  = m g,  

                                                                                                          -1 
where g is the gravitational field strength. Its value is 10 N kg  .  

            As  the  value  of  g  varies  from  place  to  place  and  also  with  altitude,  

therefore, the value of weight does not remain the same everywhere.  

            It  varies  from  place  to  place  according  to  variation  in  g.  Though  an  

object's  weight  may  vary  from  one  place  to  another,  but  at  any  particular  

location,  its  weight  is  proportional  to  its  mass.  Thus,  we  can  conveniently  

compare  the  masses  of  two  objects  at  a  given  location  by  comparing  their  

weights.  The  weight  cannot  be  measured  by  an  ordinary  balance.  A  spring  

balance can be used to measure the weight. The SI unit of weight is newton (N).  

                                                                    62  
  
﻿  Example 3.1    

              A  10  kg  block  moves  on  a  frictionless  horizontal  surface  with  an  
acceleration of 2 m s− ². What is the force acting on the block?  

  Solution  

  

Mass of a block                          =       m  =        10 kg  
Acceleration                             =       a     =   2 m s−2  

Force                                    =       F     =   ?  

By Newton's second law of motion,                                           F  =  ma  
Putting the values,                      F  = 10 kg × 2 m s−2                  =  20 kg m s−2                     =  20 N  

  Example 3.2  

              A force of 7500 N is applied to move a truck of mass 3000 kg. Find the  
acceleration produced in the truck. How long will it take to accelerate the truck  

                          –                        – 
from 36 km h ¹ to 72 km h ¹ speed?  

  Solution  

Mass of truck                            =  m          =  3000 kg  

Force applied                            =  F          =  7500 N  

Acceleration                             =  a          = ?  

                                                                          −1  
Initial speed                            =  vi         =  36 km h 

  

                                             36 ×  1000 m                                 −1  
                                         =                               =  10 m s 
                                                60  ×  60 s  
                                                                         −1         72 ×  1000 m                               −1  
Final speed                              =  v          = 72 km h                 =                             = 20 m s 
                                                  f  
                                                                                       60  ×  60 s  
Time                                     =  t          =  ?  

By Newton’s second law,                                                    F  = ma  
                                                       F  
                        or                  a  =  
                                                       m  
                                                       7500 N  
      Putting the values, a  =                                           =  2.5 m s−2  
                                                      3000 kg  
      Now, using first equation of motion,  
                                             v  =  v  +  at  
                                               f      v  –  v  
                                                 
                                                                  i  
                                                        f  
                        or                  t  =  
                                                           a  
      Putting the values, t  =                         20 m s− 1  −  10 m s−1  =  4 s  
                                                                 2.5 m s−2  

                                                                            63  
  
﻿3.7 Mechanical and Electronic Balances  
                                                                                                             
            Balance scales are commonly used to compare masses of objects or to  
weigh objects by balancing them with standard weights.  

  

  Mechanical Balances  
                                                        
            A  mechanical  balance  consists  of  a   
rigid  horizontal  beam  that  oscillates  on  a   
central knife edge as a fulcrum. It has two   
end knife edges equidistant from the centre.   
Two pans are hung from bearings on the end   
knife  edges  (Fig.3.16).  The  material  to  be   
weighed is put in one pan. Standard weights                                                                                                   
                                                                                                     Fig. 3.16  
are put on the other pan. The deflection of   
the balance may be indicated by a pointer   
                                                                                
attaches to the beam. The weights on the  
                                                                                
pan  are  adjusted  to  bring  the  beam  in   
equilibrium.                                                                    
            There is another type of mechanical   
balances  which  are  used  to  weigh  heavy   
items  like  flour  bags,  cement  bags,  steel   
bars,   etc.   These   are   called   mechanical   
platform   balances   (Fig.3.17).   Standard   
weights are not required to use this balance.   
Its reason is that the fulcrum of the beam of   
such a balance is kept very near to its one   
end. Therefore, much smaller weights have   
                                                                                
to be put at the other end of beam to bring it  
                                                                                
to equilibrium. These smaller weights have  
                                                                                
already  been  calibrated  to  the  standard  
                                                                                
weights.                                                                                                         Fig. 3.17  

  Electronic Balances  
                                                 
            No standard weights are required to                                    
use in an electronic balance (Fig.3.18). Only                                      
it has to be connected to a power supply.                                          
There are some models which can operate                                            
                                                                                   
by  using  dry  cell  batteries.  An  electronic  
                                                                                   
balance  is  more  precise  than  mechanical                                       
balance. When an object is  placed on it, its                                      
mass is displayed on its screen. Now-a-days,                                       
                                                                                                 Fig. 3.18  
                                                                    64  

  
﻿electronic balances also display the total price of the material if the rate per kg is  
fed to the balance.  

  

  Force Meter  

  

             A force  meter is a scientific instrument that  measures   
force. It is also called as a newton meter or a spring balance   
                                                                                                                   
(Fig.3.19).  Now a days digital force meters are also available.   
You  have  already  learnt  about  mechanical  and  electronic   
balances. They measure mass of the objects in kilograms or its   
                                                                                                                   
multiples.  On  the  other  hand,  force  meter  measures  force  
                                                                                                                   
directly in newtons (N).                                                                                           
             An ordinary force meter has a spring inside it. Upper   
                                                                                                                   
end of the spring is attached to a handle. A hook is attached to  
                                                                                                                   
the lower end the spring that holds the object. A pointer is also   
attached to the spring at its upper end. A scale in newtons is   
                                                                                                                   
provided along the spring such that the pointer coincides with  
                                                                                                                   
zero of the scale when nothing is hung with the hook.                                                              

                                                                                                                                                  
             The object to be weighed is hung                                                                      
with the hook. The mass of the object                                                                                       Fig. 3.19  

causes  the  spring  to  compress.  The  
pointer   indicates   the   weight   of   the  
object. However, some force meters are  
also  based  on  the  stretching  of  the  
spring when a load is hung. In this case,  
                                                                                                                    Do You Know?  
the pointer is attached at the lower end  
of the spring.                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                
             In   some   spring   balances,   the                                                               
scale measures the mass which can be  
                                                                                                                
readily          converted             into       newtons             by                                                      The weight  
multiplying the mass in kg with the value                                                                                       of 100 g  
                                                                                                                             mass is 1 N.  
                          -2 
of  g  = 10 m s  .  
             A  digital  force  meter  measures  
directly  the  weight  of  the  object  in                                                                  
                                                                                     Fig. 3.20  
newtons (Fig. 3.20).  

                                                                        65  
  
﻿ 3.8 Friction  
                                   
           When  a  cricket  ball  is  hit  by  the  bat,  it  moves  on  the  ground  with  a  
reasonably large velocity. According to Newton's first law of motion, it should  
continue  to  move  with  constant  velocity.  But,  practically,  we  observe  that  it  
eventually stops after covering some distance. Does any force act on the ball in  
opposite direction that stops the ball? Yes, it is the force of friction between the  
ball and the ground that opposes the motion of the ball.  
  

 Dissipative Effect of Friction  

           Friction is a dissipative force due to which the energy is wasted in doing  
work to overcome against friction. The lost energy appears in the form of heat.  
          A very common example of energy dissipation is  
the rubbing of hands (Fig.3.21). When we rub our hands,  
heat is produced due to friction and our hands become  
warm. Similarly, the temperature of machines rises due  
to friction between its moving parts that can cause many  
problems.  The  tyres  of  vehicles  also  wear  out  after  
becoming  too  hot  due  to  friction  between  tyres  and  
                                                                                        Fig. 3.21 Rubbing hands  
road.  

           Shooting of stars seen in the sky at night also happen due to friction of air.  
These  are  actually  asteroids  that  enter  the  Earth's  atmosphere.  As  they  are  
moving, air resistance causes generation of heat. Their temperature becomes so  
high that they start burning and ultimately disintegrate.  

                                                   Do You Know?  

                     On a wet road, the water does not form  
          wet layer between the tyre surface and the road  
          surface due to the spaces in the tread pattern on  
          the tyre. This reduces the chances of skidding of  
          vechicles on wet roads.  

  

 Sliding Friction  

           The friction between two solid surfaces is called sliding friction which can  
be divided into two categories.  
           1. Static friction                        2. Kinetic friction  

                                                           66  
  
﻿                                                                                          F 
Static Friction                                                                             n  

           Let us consider the motion of a block  
                                                                                 F              F  = T  
                                                                                  s  
on a horizontal surface. The arrangement is  
shown in Fig. 3.22. When a weight is put in  
the pan, a force F = T equal to the sum of this  
                                                                                            mg  
weight and weight of the pan acts on the  
block. This force tends to pull the block. At                                             Fig. 3.22  
the  same  time  an  opposing  force  appears                             For Your Information!  
that  does   not   let  the   block   move.  This                        Some frogs can cling  
opposing force is the static friction F .                                to a vertical surface,  
                                                           S 
                                                                         such   as  this   leaf,  
Kinetic Friction  
                                                                         because of the static  
           If we go on adding more weights in  f r i ction  between  
the pan one by one in small steps, a stage will  their   feet   and   the  
come  when  the  block  starts  sliding  on  the                         surface.  

horizontal surface. This is the limit of static friction that is equal to the total  
weights including pan. When the block is sliding, friction still exists. It is known as  
kinetic friction.  

                                                      Do You Know?  

             When a shuttle re-enters the Earth’s atmosphere, the friction caused by the  
               atmosphere raises the surface temperature of the shuttle to over 950°C.  

  

 Terminal Velocity  
                                              
                                                                                                                      −2 
           When an object falls freely, it is accelerated by an amount g = 10 m s  . But  
practically the acceleration may be different. Air resistance plays an important  
role in determining how fast an object accelerates when it falls.  
           If we drop a cricket ball and a piece of Styrofoam of the same weight from  
a certain height, they will hit the ground at the same time only if there were no air  
resistance.  Both  would  fall with the same acceleration  
g = 10 m s−2. Practically, the ball in air, would drop faster.  

The Styrofoam having larger surface would face greater  
opposing force of the air and thus moves slowly.  
           Experiments have been made in this respect and  
it was found that the faster an object falls the more air  
resistance will be exerted on it. A speed is finally attained  
at which the upward force of air resistance balances the  
downward  force  of  gravity.  When  this  happens,  the                                     Fig. 3.23  
object  stops accelerating.  It  keeps falling at a constant    A paratrooper falling with  

                                                                                                   terminal velocity  
                                                              67  
  
﻿velocity.  This  constant  velocity  achieved  by  an  object  is  called  its  terminal  
velocity. Even a heavy object like a meteorite does not gain an infinite velocity as  
it falls to the Earth.  
            This principle applies to paratroopers. Air resistance acting against the  
large surface area of a parachute allows for descent at a safer velocity (Fig.3.23).  

  

                                                       Do You Know?  

          Friction in human joints  is very low because  
          our   bodies   contain   a   natural   lubricating  
          system.  Consequently,  though  our  bones   Bones                                             Lubricating  
                                                                                                             Fluid  
          rub against each other at the points as we  
          move, yet bones do not normally wear out,  
          even after many years of use.                                              Knee joint  

  

  Rolling Friction  

            The static and kinetic friction which we have studied so far is the sliding  
friction. There is another type of friction which is called rolling friction. When an  
object rolls over a surface, the friction produced is called rolling friction. The idea  
o f r o l l i n g f r i c t i o n  i s   For Your Information!  
a s s o c i a t e d w i t h  t h e               Practically,  the  contact  point  is  
concept  of  wheel.  In  our                     not perfectly circular; it becomes  
everyday  life,  we  observe                     flat under pressure as shown in  
that  a  body  with  wheels                      figure.  This  flat  portion  of  the  
faces  l  ess  f  r  i ct  ion  as               wheel has the tendency to slide  
compared to a body of the                        against  the  surface  and  does  
same  size  without  wheels.                     produce a frictional force.  

Ball bearings also play the same role as is played by the wheels. Many machines  
in industry are designed with ball bearings so that the moving parts roll on the  
ball bearing and friction is greatly reduced. The rolling friction is about one  
hundred times smaller than the sliding friction.  
            The reason for the                For Your Information!  
rolling friction to be less                    A hovercraft is a kind of ship  
than the sliding friction is                   that   can   move   over   the  
that  there  is  no  relative                  surface of water and ground  
motion   between  the                          b o t h .  A i r   i s   e j e c t e d  
wheel   and   the   surface                    underneath          by     powerful  
over  which  it  rolls.  The                   fans  forming  a  cushion  of  
w h e e l t o u c h e s  t h e                 air.  The  hovercraft  moves  
surface only at a point.  It                   over the cushion of air which  
does not slide.                                offers very small resistance.  

                                                                68  
  
﻿  Methods to Reduce Friction  
                                                                                     

The following methods are used to reduce friction:  
(i)        The parts which slide against each other are highly polished.  
(ii)       Since, the friction of liquids is less than that of solid  
           surfaces, therefore, oil or grease is applied between  
           the moving parts of the machinery.  
(iii)      As  rolling  friction  is  much  less  than  the  sliding  
                                                                                                                                                 
           friction,  so  sliding  friction  is  converted  into  rolling                                               Fig. 3.24  
           friction by the use of ball bearings (Fig. 3.24)  in the machines and wheels  
           under the heavy objects.  
(iv)       Frictional  force  does  not  act  only  among  solids,  high  speed  vehicles,  
           aeroplanes and ships also face friction  
          while moving through air or water. If the  
           front  of  a  vehicle  is  flat,  it  faces  more  
           resistance by air or water. Therefore, the  
           bodies moving through air or water are  
           streamlined  to  minimize  air  or  water  
                                                                                                                                                       
           friction.   In  this  case,  the  air   passes                                  Fig. 3.25  Streamline air flow over  
           smoothly  over  the  slanting  surface  of                                                              a speedy car  

          vehicle. This type of flow of air is known as streamline flow. A streamline  
           flow over the car is shown in Fig. 3.25. The vehicles designed pointed from  
           the front are said to be streamlined.  

  

 3.9 Momentum and Impulse  

             Suppose that a bicycle rider and a heavy truck are moving with the same  
speed, which one can be stopped easily, depends on the quantity of motion of  
the moving body. It is our common observation that quantity of motion in a  
moving body depends on its mass and velocity. Greater is the mass, the greater  
will be the quantity of motion. Similarly, greater is the velocity, the greater will be  
quantity of motion. This quantity of motion is called momentum and denoted by  
p. It is defined as:  

  

     The momentum of a moving body is the product of its mass and velocity.  

                                    Therefore,                   p = m × v ............................. (3.2)  
 Like  velocity  momentum  is  also  a  vector  quantity.  The  SI  unit  momentum  is  

              – 1 
(kg m s  ). It can also be written as (N s).  

                                                                         69  
  
﻿           When a ball is hit by a bat, the force is exerted on the ball for a very short  
interval of time. In such cases, it is very difficult to calculate the exact magnitude  
of  the  force.  However,  initial  velocity  vi   of  the  ball  and  final  velocity  v  after f  
collision can be found easily.  
           During a time interval ∆ t, the average acceleration a is given by  

                                       ∆v        v  − vf  i                             
                                a  =          =                                        (3.3)  
                                       ∆t           ∆ 
                                                       
           According to Newton's second law of motion, the value of average force  
acting during the interval ∆ t will be:  
                                               ∆v  
                       F  =  ma  =  m(               )  
                                                ∆ t  
      or               F  ×  ∆ t  =  m(∆v)  =  m (v  − v )                                         (3.4)  
                                                               f      i 

           Equation  (3.4)  shows  that  F  and ∆  t  cannot  be  exactly  known  but  their  
product  which  is  equal  to  the  change  of  momentum  (mv                                      –  mv )  can  be  
                                                                                                 f          i 

calculated. For such cases, the product F × ∆ t is called as Impulse of the force.  

  

   When a large force F acts on an object for a short interval of time, the impulse  
   of  the  force  is  defined  as  the  total  change  in  momentum  of  the  object.  

 Dividing both sides of Eq.3.4 by ∆t, we have  
                                           m(∆v)  
                                    F  = ...................................... (3.5)  
                                              ∆ t  

where m(∆v) is the change in momentum ∆p.  Equation (3.5) gives the value of  
force in terms of momentum i.e., force acting on an object is equal to the change  
in momentum of the object per unit time.  
                                            ∆p  
                                    F  =                        . ............ (3.6)  
                                            ∆t  
Equation (3.6) suggests to define Newton’s second law of motion in terms of  
momentum i.e.,  

                                The rate of change of momentum of a  
                                body is equal to the force acting on it.  

The direction of change in momentum is that of the force.  

                                                            70  
  
﻿   Do you know?                                 For Your Information!  

    A cricketer draws his                       The arrow penetrates into the apple,  
    h a n d s  b a c k  t o                     and in response, the momentum of  
    reduce   the   impact                       the apple changes. Conversely, the  
    o  f  t  h  e  b  a  l  l  b y              apple   applies   an   opposing  
    increasing the time.                        force  to  the  arrow,  and  in  
                                                response, the momentum of the arrow changes.  
                                                                                                               
                                            
                                    Packing of Fragile Objects  
    Fragile objects such as glassware may break easily due to  
   jerks or by the direct impact with hard objects during  
    their transportation.  
    To  protect  them  soft,  packing  materials  are  used  for  
    these objects. These materials reduce the effect of quick  
    change in momentum. Consequently, the force acting on the fragile objects  
    is greatly reduced. Special materials like Styrofoam, corrugated cardboard  
    sheets, bubble wrap are used for the packing of such objects.  

                                            Crumple Zones  

                                                                       Air bag       Seatbelts  
  A  c r u m p l e  z o n e  o f  a n        Crumple zone  
  automobile         is   a   structural  
  feature designed to compress  
  during an accident to absorb  
  deformation energy from the  
  impact.       Typically,      crumple  
  zones are located in front and  
  behind  of  the  main  body  of  
  the vehicle.  
  Crumple zones work by managing crash energy absorbing within the outer  
  parts of the vehicle, rather than being directly transmitted to the occupants.  
  This is achieved by controlled weakling of outer parts (plastic bumpers, etc.)  
  of the vehicle, while strengthening of the passenger cabin.  

  Example 3.3  

                                                                                                         – 
  A bullet of mass 15 g is fired by a gun. If the velocity of the bullet is 150 m s ¹,  
what is its momentum?  

  Solution  

Mass of bullet               =    m  =  15 g              = 0.015 kg  

                                                     71  
  
﻿Velocity of bullet               =  v        =  150 m s− 1  

Momentum                         =    p   =  ?  
Using the formula,              p      =      mv  

                                                                   − 
Putting the value,              p  =  0.015 kg × 150 m s ¹  
or                              p  =  2.25 kg m s−¹  

  Example 3.4  
           A cricket ball of mass  160 g is hit by a bat. The ball leaves the bat with a  

                           –                                                                               – 
velocity of 52 m s ¹. If the ball strikes the bat with a velocity of -28 m s ¹ (opposite  

direction) before hitting, find the average force exerted on the ball by the bat.  

                                                                             – 
The ball remains in contact with the bat for 4 × 10 ³ s.  

  Solution  

Mass of ball                     m  = 160 g            = 0.16 kg  

                                                   − 
Initial velocity                 v   = −28 m s ¹  
                                  i  
                                                  − 
Final velocity                   vf  =  52 m s ¹  
Time of contact                  t = 4 ×10 ³ s − 

Average force                    F = ?  
From Eq. (3.6), we have  
                                     m(v − v)  
                               F           f     i 
                                   =  
                                           t  
Putting the values,                                      −                    − 
                                 0.16 kg  [52 m s ¹  −  (−28 m s ¹)]  
                             F  =  
                                                             − 
                                                   4 ×  10 ³ s  
                 or          F  =  3200 N  
 3.10 Principle of Conservation of Momentum   
                                                                                    
                                                                                   v₁         v₂  
The collection of objects is known as a ‘system’. If no  
external force acts on any object of the system, it is                                          
                                                                                    m₁         m₂  
known as isolated system. Consider a system of two                                                   
                                                                                           
balls of masses m₁  and m₂. Suppose that the balls                                               F     -F  
                                                                                    
are  moving with velocities v and v  along a straight                                           
                                             1        2  
line in the same direction. If v1                  > v2  , the balls will                       m₁  m₂  
                                                                                                         v₁         v₂  
collide  as  shown  in  Fig.  3.26.  If  their  velocities  
become v₁ , and v ₂  respectively after collision, then                                                                     
Total momentum of the system before collision  =  m₁v₁ +  m₂v₂                                            Fig. 3.26   

Total momentum of the system after collision                                =  m₁v₁  +  m₂v₂  

The principle of conservation of momentum states that:  

                                                             72  
  
﻿       If no external force acts on an isolated system, the final total momentum  
       of  the  system  is  equal  to  the  initial  total  momentum  of  the  system.  
                                                                                                                 
This means, that:  
                                                                   
                      Total momentum of the                             Total momentum of the  
                       system before collision                 =           system after collision  

                       or     m₁v₁  +  m₂v₂                    =              m₁v ₁  +  m₂v ₂  
          To explain this principle, let us consider the collision of two identical balls  
in which the second ball is at rest.  
                                                                                 v₁             v₂  = 0  
          When there is collision of two balls, there is  
                                                                                                 
                                                                           
a transfer of momentum from one ball to another.                                      F      −F  

The  ball  at  rest  gains  momentum  and  starts  
                                                                                                  
moving whereas the striking ball slows down. If                                            v₁  =  ₀  
                                                                                                          v₂  =  v₁  
the balls are identical, we will observe that there is   
                                                                                            
a  total  transfer  of  momentum.  The  striking  ball                                     Fig. 3.27  

comes to rest and the other ball starts moving with the same speed (Fig.3. 27). It  

means that second ball gains momentum equal to that lost by the first one. If the  

first ball stops after collision, the second ball moves with the momentum of the  

first ball. This suggests that the total momentum of the two balls after collision  

remains the same as total momentum before collision.  

The principle of conservation                                            Seatbelts  

of  momentum  is  applicable                  When a moving car stops suddenly,  
not  only  to  macro-objects                  the    passengers   move   forward  
but  also  for  micro-objects                 toward  the  windshield.  Seatbelts  
                                               prevent  the   passengers  from  
like atoms and molecules.  
                                               moving. Thus, chances of hitting the  
                                               passengers against the windshield  
  
                                              or steering wheel are reduced.  
  Example 3.5  

          A bullet of mass m  is fired by a gun of mass m₂. Find the velocity of the  
                                      1  

gun in terms of velocity of bullet v₁ just  after firing.  

  Solution  

          Before  firing,  the  velocity  of  bullet  as  well  as  that  of  gun  was  zero.  

Therefore, total momentum of bullet and gun was also zero. After firing, the  

bullet moves forward with velocity v₁ whereas the gun moves with velocity v₂.  

                                                         73  
  
﻿According      to      law      of      conservation      of      momentum,  
        Total momentum before firing                                    =       Total momentum after firing  
Putting the values,                                         0           =       m₁v₁  +  m₂v₂  
                                                            m₂v₂        =       − m₁v₁  
            or  
                                                                              −m₁v₁  
                                                                   v₂  =  
                                                                                 m₂  

            The  negative  sign  in  this  equation,  indicates  that  the  gun  moves  
backward, i.e. opposite to the bullet. It is because of the backward motion of the  

gun that the shooter gets a jerk  on his shoulder.  

  

  Example 3.6                                                                                                    

                                                                                                           −1  
            A  ball  of  mass  3  kg  moving  with  a  velocity  of  5  ms                                      collides  with  a  

stationary ball of mass 2 kg and then both of them move together. If the friction is  

negligible, find out the velocity with which both the balls will move after collision.  

  Solution  

Mass of first ball                                                      = m  = 3 kg  
                                                                               1  
Velocity of first ball before collision                                 = v = 5 m s−l  
                                                                              1  

Mass of second ball                                                     = m  = 2 kg  
                                                                               2  

Velocity of second ball before collision                                = v  = 0  
                                                                             2  

Velocity of both the balls after collision                              = v  = ?  
Total mass of balls after collision                                     = m  + m  
                                                                               1 
                                                                                 
By        law        of        conversion        of        momentum,   

Total momentum before collision  =  Total momentum after collision  
or                                  m₁ v₁ + m  v   =  (m₁ + m ) v  
                                                    2    2 
                                                      
             Putting the values,                       
                                   3 kg × 5 m s−l  + 0  =  (3 kg + 2 kg) v  
                                   15 kg m s−l        =  5 kg × v  
                                               v  =  3 m s−l  

                                                                   74  
  
﻿                                             KEY POINTS  

   A force is a push or a pull that starts, stops and changes the magnitude and direction  
    of velocity of a body.  
   A contact force is a force that acts at the point of contact between two objects.  
   Non-contact force is a force between two objects which are not in physical contact.  
   Gravitational force, electromagnetic force, strong nuclear force and weak nuclear  
    force are the four fundamental forces in nature.  
   Every object  in the  universe attracts  every other  object with a force that  is  directly  
    proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square  
    of the distance between them. This is known as Newton’s law of gravitation.  
   Newton's first law of motion states that a body continues its state of rest or of uniform  
    motion with the same constant velocity, unless acted upon by some net external  
    force.  
   The  property  of  a  body to  maintain  its  state  of  rest  or  of  uniform  motion  is  called  
    inertia.  
   The second law of motion states that when a net force acts upon a body, it produces  
    an acceleration in the direction of force and the magnitude of acceleration is directly  
    proportional to the force and is inversely proportional to the mass.  
   The third  law  of  motion  states that to  every  action there  is  an  equal  but  opposite  
    reaction.  
   Action and reaction do not act on the same body but act on two different bodies.  
    Mass  of  a  body  is  the  quantity  of  matter  in  it.  It  determines  the  magnitude  of  
    acceleration produced when a force acts on it. Mass of a body does not vary.  It is a  
    scalar quantity and its unit is kilogram (kg).  
   The weight  of  an  object  is  equal to the force with which the  Earth  attracts  a  body  
    towards its centre.  
   Force meter is a scientific instrument that measures force in newtons (N).  
   Friction is the force that tends to prevent the bodies from sliding over each other.  
    The resisting force between the two surfaces before the motion starts is called the  
    static friction. The maximum value of the static friction is called a limiting friction.  
   The friction during motion is called kinetic friction.  
    When a body moves with the help of wheels, the friction in this case is known as  
    rolling friction. Rolling friction is much less as compared to the sliding friction.  
   Energy is wasted in doing work against friction that appears in the form of heat.  
    When upward air resistance balances the downward force of gravity on a falling  
    object, it falls down with constant (safe) velocity, it is called terminal velocity.  
   The product of mass and velocity of a moving body is called momentum.  
    The principle of conservation of momentum states that if no external force acts on an  
    isolated system, the final total momentum of the system is equal to the initial total  
    momentum of the system.  
   Impulse is defined as the product of F × Δ t = m × ΔV = total change in momentum.  

                                                      75  
  
﻿                                               EXERCISE  
                                                                                 

 A       Multiple Choice Questions  
         Tick () the correct answer.  
3.1.      When we kick a stone, we get hurt. This is due to:  
          (a) inertia         (b) velocity        (c) momentum                 (d) reaction  
3.2.      An object will continue its motion with constant acceleration until:  
          (a) the resultant force on it begins to decrease.  
          (b) the resultant force on it is zero.  
          (c) the resultant force on it begins to increase.  
          (d) the resultant force is at right angle to its tangential velocity.  
3.3.      Which of the following is a non-contact force?  
          (a) Friction                                      (b) Air resistance  
          (c) Electrostatic force                           (d) Tension in the string  
3.4.       A ball with initial momentum p hits a solid wall and bounces back with the  
                                                      /  
          same velocity. Its momentum  p  after collision will be:  

                /                   /                            / 
          (a) p  = p          (b) p  = – p                  (c) p  = 2 p                 (d) p  = –2 p  
3.5.       A particle of mass m moving with a velocity v collides with another particle  
          of the same mass at rest. The velocity of the first particle after collision is:  
          (a) v               (b) –v              (c) 0              (d) – 1/2  
3.6.      Conservation of linear momentum is equivalent to:  
          (a) Newton's first law of motion      (b) Newton's second law of motion  
          (c) Newton's third law of motion    (d) None of these  
3.7.       An object with a mass of 5 kg moves at constant velocity of 10 m s ¹. A − 

          constant force then acts for 5 seconds on the object and gives it a velocity  

                     – 
          of 2 m s ¹ in the opposite direction. The force acting on the object is:  
          (a) 5 N             (b) – 10 N                    (c) – 12 N        (d) – 15 N  
3.8.       A large force acts on an object for a very short interval of time. In this case,  
          it is easy to determine:  
          (a) magnitude of force                            (b) time interval  
          (c) product of force and time                     (d) none of these  
3.9.       A  lubricant  is  usually  introduced  between  two  surfaces  to  decrease  
          friction. The lubricant:  
          (a) decreases temperature                                       (b) acts as ball bearings  
          (c) prevents direct contact of the surfaces    (d) provides rolling friction  

                                                        76  
  
﻿ B      Short Answer Questions  
                                                           

3.1.   What kind of changes in motion may be produced by a force?  
3.2.   Give 5 examples of contact forces.  
3.3.   An object moves with constant velocity in free space. How long will the  
        object continue to move with this velocity?  
3.4.   Define impulse of force.  
3.5.   Why has not Newton's first law been proved on the Earth?  
3.6.   When sitting in a car which suddenly accelerates from rest, you are pushed  
        back into the seat, why?  
3.7.   The force expressed in Newton's second law is a net force. Why is it so?  
3.8.   How can you show that rolling friction is lesser than the sliding friction?  
3.9.   Define terminal velocity of an object.  
3.10. An astronaut walking in space wants to return to his spaceship by firing a  
        hand rocket. In what direction does he fire the rocket?  

  

 C      Constructed Response Questions  

3.1     Two ice skaters weighing 60kg and 80 kg push off against each other on a  

                                                                                              − 
        frictionless ice track. The 60 kg skater gains a velocity of 4 m s ¹. Considering  
        all  the  relevant  calculations  involved,  explain  how  Newton's  third  law  
        applies to this situation.  
3.2     Inflatable air bags are installed in the vehicles as safety equipment. In terms  
        of momentum, what is the advantage of air bags over seatbelts?  
3.3     A horse refuses to pull a cart. The horse argues, “according to Newton’s  
        third law, whatever force I exert on the cart, the cart will exert an equal and  
        opposite force on me. Since the net force will be zero, therefore, I have no  
        chance  of  accelerating  (pulling)  the  cart.”  What  is  wrong  with  this  
        reasoning?  
3.4.   When a cricket ball hits high, a fielder tries to catch it. While holding the ball  
        he/she draws hands backward. Why?  
3.5.   When someone jumps  from a small boat onto the river bank, why does the  
       jumper  often fall into the water? Explain.  
3.6.   Imagine that if friction vanishes suddenly from everything, then what could  
        be the scenario of daily life activities?  

                                                       77  
  
﻿ D       Comprehensive Questions  
                                                                  
3.1.   Explain the concept of force by practical examples.  
3.2.   Describe Newton's laws of motion.  
3.3.   Define momentum and express Newton's 2nd law of motion in terms of  
        change in momentum.  
3.4.   State and explain the principle of conservation of momentum.  
3.5.   Describe the motion of a block on a table taking into account the friction  
        between the two surfaces. What is the static friction and kinetic friction?  
3.6.   Explain the effect of friction on the motion of vehicles in context of tyre  
        surface and braking force.  

  

  E      Numerical Problems  

3.1.   A 10 kg block is placed on a smooth horizontal surface. A horizontal force of  
        5 N is applied to the block. Find:  
                     (a) the acceleration produced in the block.  

                                                                                              −             − 
                     (b) the velocity of block after 5 seconds.                    (0.5 m s ², 2.5 m s ¹)  
3.2.   The mass of a person is 80 kg. What will be his weight on the Earth? What  
        will be his weight on the Moon? The value of acceleration due to gravity of  

                                −2 
        Moon is 1.6 m s  .                                                         (800 N,  128 N)  

                                                                                                                  − 
3.3.   What force is required to increase the velocity of 800 kg car from 10 m s ¹ to  

                  − 
        30 m s ¹ in 10 seconds?                                                    (1600 N)  

                                                                                                                  − 
3.4.   A 5 g bullet is fired by a gun. The bullet moves with a velocity of 300 m s ¹. If  

                                                                                                                    − 
        the mass of the gun is 10 kg, find the recoil speed of the gun.    (−0.15 m s ¹)  
3.5.   An astronaut weighs 70 kg. He throws a wrench of mass 300 g at a speed of  
        3.5 m s−1. Determine:  

        (a) the speed of astronaut as he recoils away from the wrench.  
        (b) the distance covered by the astronaut in 30 minutes.  

                                                                                                  −      −1 
                                                                                   (– 1.5 × 10 ² m s  , 27 m)  

                       3                                                                                             − 1 
3.6.   A 6.5 ×  10  kg bogie of a goods train is moving with a velocity of 0.8 m s  .  

                                                      3  
        Another bogie of mass 9.2×10  kg coming from behind with a velocity of  

                    − 1  
        1.2 m s        collides with the first one and couples to it. Find the common  

                                                                                                                   − 1 
        velocity of the two bogies after they become coupled.                                         (1.03 m s  )  
3.7.   A cyclist weighing 55 kg rides a bicycle of mass 5 kg. He starts from rest and  
        applies a force of 90 N for 8 seconds. Then he continues at a constant speed  
        for another 8 seconds. Calculate the total distance travelled by the cyclist.  
                                                                                                         (144 m)  

                                                          78  
  
﻿3.8.   A ball of mass 0.4 kg is dropped on the floor from a height of 1.8 m. The ball  
        rebounds straight upward to a height of 0.8 m. What is the magnitude and  
        direction of the impulse applied to the ball by the floor?  
                                                                                             (4 N s, upward)  
3.9. Two balls of masses 0.2 kg and 0.4 kg are moving towards each other with  
        velocities 20 m s− 1  and 5 m s− 1   respectively. After collision, the velocity  of  
        0.2 kg ball becomes 6 m s−1. What will be the velocity of 0.4 kg ball?  

                                                                                                                −1 
                                                                                                        (2 m s  )  

                                                        79  
  
