   Chapter  
         8                 Magnetism  

  
 Student Learning Outcomes  

 After completing this chapter, students will be able to:  

  [SLO: P-09-E-01]  Describe the  
  forces  between  magnetic  poles  
  and   between   magnets   and  
  magnetic   materials   [Including  

  the use of the terms  north  pole  
  (N  pole),  south  pole  (S  pole),  
  attraction   and   repulsion,  

  magnetized  and  unmagnetized]  
  [SLO:   P-09 -E-02]   Describe  
  induced magnetism  

  [SLO:  P-09-E-03]  Differentiate  
  b e t w e e n t e m p o r a r y a n d  
  permanent magnets  
  [SLO: P-09-E-04] Describe magnetic fields [as a region in which a magnetic pole experiences  

  a force]  
  [SLO: P-09-E-05] State that the direction of the magnetic field at a point is the direction of  
  the force on the N pole of a magnet at that point  

  [SLO: P-09-E-06] State that the relative strength of a magnetic field is represented by the  
  spacing of the magnetic field lines  
  [SLO: P-09-E-7] Describe uses of permanent magnets and electromagnets  

  [SLO:  P-09-E-8]  Explain qualitatively in terms of the domain theory of magnetism how  

  materials  can  be  magnetized  and  demagnetize  [stroking  method,  heating,  orienting  in  
  north-south direction and striking, use of a solenoid]  
  [SLO:  P-09-E-9]  Differentiate  between  ferromagnetic,  paramagnetic  and  diamagnetic  
  materials  [by  making  reference  to  the  domain  theory  of  magnetism  and  the  effects  of  

  external magnetic fields on these materials]  
  [SLO: P-09-E-10] Analyse applications of magnets in recording technology [and illustrate  
  how electronic devices need to be kept safe from strong magnetic fields]  

  [SLO:  P-09-E-11]  State that soft magnetic materials (such as  soft iron) can be used to  
  provide shielding from magnetic fields  

         Almost all  of us are familiar with a magnet because of its interesting  
properties. In lower, classes we have studied some of the properties. You might  
have also enjoyed a magnet attracting small pieces of iron.  

                                                     161  
  
﻿8.1 Magnetic Materials  
                                                                 

            Magnetism is a force that acts at a distance upon magnetic materials.  
These materials are attracted to magnets. These materials are called magnetic  
materials. Let us perform an activity to test such materials.  

  Activity 1  

             The teacher should divide the students into  
  groups  and  provide  them  permanent  magnets  to  
  perform this activity.  

              Each group should collect some items made  
  of different materials such as copper wire, nickel ring,  
  glass  bottle,  paper  clips,  iron  nail,  eraser,  wooden  
  ruler, plastic comb, etc. Place them on a table as shown  
  in figure. Bring the permanent magnet close to each  
  item   one   by   one   and   observe  which   items   are  

  attracted by the magnet and which are not. Make a list of magnetic and non magnetic  
  materials.  
              Materials such as iron, nickel and cobalt will be attracted by the magnet. They are  
  magnetic materials. The materials such as brass, copper, wood, glass and plastic are not  
  attracted by the magnet. They are called non-magnetic materials.  

            We will discuss different types of materials in detail later in this chapter.  

  

 For Your Information!  

   Over  1000  years  ago,  the  Greeks  discovered  a  rock  called  lodestone  or  
   magnetite that could attract materials that contained iron. Also, if suspended  
   from a string to rotate freely, it would always settle in north-south direction.  
   This unique property led to form the basis of compass which was later on  
   used for navigation on land and at sea.  

  

  Activity 2                                                                                          
             The teacher should facilitate each group to perform                                      
 this activity as per instructions.                                                                   

  1.    Place some iron filings scattered on the                                                      
        top of a card paper or a sheet of glass.                                                                    (b) Iron filings  
  2.    Move a magnet beneath the card paper,                                                                       attracted  
        glass or a plastic sheet as shown in the                                                                    by magnet  
                                                                    (a) Scattered Iron  
        figure.  
                                                                    filings on a glass s heet  
  3.    What do you observe? Describe briefly.  

        You must have seen the iron filings following the movement of the You  must  have  seen the  iron  filings  following the  magnet.  Magnetic  
        force  account  for  these  movements.  This  activity  also  shows  that magnet. Magnetic force accounts for these movements. This activity  
        also shows that magnets can attract objects containing iron, etc. even if magnets can attract objects containing iron etc. even if they are not in  
        they are not in direct contact with them. direct contact with them.  

                                                                   162  
  
﻿8.2 Properties of Magnets  
                                                                          

            The property of attracting magnetic materials by the magnets has been  
discussed above. The magnets also exhibit the following properties.  
  

 1. Magnetic Poles                                                                                                              North  
                                                                                                  
                                             
             I  f  a  bar  magnet  is  suspended                                                               West                   East  

 horizontally through a string and allowed to                                                                        South  
come  to  rest,  it  will  point  in  north-south  
direction. The end of the magnet that points  
 north is called the north magnetic pole (N)  
                                                                                                                      Fig. 8.1  
and rhe end that points south is the south  
magnetic pole (S) as shown in Fig. 8.1.                                                                 
                                                                                                        
2. Attraction and Repulsion of Magnetic Poles   
                                                                                                        
            When two freely suspended bar magnets are                                                   
 placed close to each other, the two north poles will                                                   
                                                                                                        
 repel  each  other  (Fig.  8.2).  So  will  the  two  south                                                Fig. 8.2  
 poles (Fig. 8.3).                                                                                      
             However, if the north pole of one is placed                                                
 near  the  south  pole  of  the  other,  the  poles  will                                              
attract  (Fig.  8.4  &  Fig.  8.5).  We  can  say  that  Like                                              Fig. 8.3  
poles repel and unlike poles attract.                                                                   
                                                                                                        

3.  Identification of a Magnet                                                                          
                                                                                                            Fig. 8.4  
            To identify whether an object is a magnet or                                                
                                                                                                        
simply a magnetic material, we can bring its one end  
close to any pole of a suspended bar magnet. If it is                                                   
attracted, then we can conclude that the end of the                                                         Fig. 8.5  

object  is  either  of  opposite  pole  to  that  of  the  
suspended magnet or it is simply a magnetic material. Then we should bring the  
same end of the object close to the other end of the suspended magnet.  If the  
object is again attracted, it is not a magnet but it is a magnetic material.  
 If it is repelled by the other end of the suspended magnet, then the object is a  
 magnet.  

  

                                   The repulsion between the like poles is  
                                          a real test to identify a magnet.  

                                                                    163  
  
﻿4. Is Isolated Magnetic Pole Possible?  
                                                                                   
            If  we  break  a  bar  magnet  into  two  equal                                 

pieces, can we get N-pole and S-pole separately?   N                                                                           S   
No, it is not possible. Each piece will have its two                                        

                                                                                        N       S  N       S  N       S  N       S  
poles, i.e., N-pole and S-pole. Even if a magnet is                                         
divided into thousands pieces, each piece will be a                                                     Fig. 8.6  
complete magnet with its N, and S-poles (Fig.8.6).  

  

8.3 Induced Magnetism  
                                                                
            Magnetic material such as iron or steel can be made a magnet. This is  
known as magnetization. In other words, we can say that magnetism has induced  
in it. You can perform an activity to observe this fact.  

  Activity 3  

        The teacher should facilitate each group to perform this activity as per instructions.  
   1.   Take a magnetic compass. Put it on a table and see which end of its needle points north.  
        The N-pole of the needle is usually coloured red.  
   2.    Place a bar magnet on the table. Bring the compass near to its N-pole. In which direction  
        does the N-pole of the needle stay?  
  
  
  

  
   3.    Put the compass near to the S-pole of the bar magnet. In which direction does the N-pole  
         of the needle stay this time?  
   4.    Now place an iron nail having its head in contact with any pole of the bar magnet.  
  

  
                                                                                 N             S  
  
   5.   Put the compass near to the pointed end of an iron nail. Observe the direction in which  
        N-pole  of  the  needle  settles.  Has  the  nail  become  a  magnet?  Has  magnetism  been  
        induced in it?  
  6.    Take the bar magnet away from the nail. Again check the behaviour of the nail by bringing  
        compass near to its ends. Does the magnetism vanish?  
        From the above activity, we conclude that the S-pole of the true magnet induces N-pole  
        in the near end of the piece of iron (nail) while the far end of the iron piece becomes S-  
        pole as shown in the figure.  
        It  should  be  noted  that  the  induced  magnetism  vanishes  as  the  true  magnet  is  
         removed.  

                                                                164  
  
﻿8.4 Temporary and Permanent Magnets  
                                                                                           

          Temporary  magnets  are  the  magnets  that  work  in  the  presence  of  a  
magnetic field of permanent magnets. Once the magnetic field vanishes, they  
lose their magnetic properties. You have learnt something about a magnetic field  
in lower classes.  In the next chapter, we will study it in detail.  
          Usually, soft iron is used to make temporary magnets. Paper clips, office  
pins and iron nails can easily be made temporary magnets. Electromagnets are  
also good examples of temporary magnets. You have already learnt different  
uses of electromagnets.  
          Permanent magnets retain their magnetic properties forever. These are  
either found in nature or artificially made by placing objects made of steel and  
some special alloys in a strong  magnetic field for a sufficient time. There are  
many types of permanent magnetic materials. For example cobalt, alnico and  
ferrite.  

  
 Activity 4  

            The  teacher  should  facilitate  the  groups  to  
  provide each a bar magnet, a stand with clamp, some  
  small nails made of iron and also some nails of steel. He  
  should further supervise them to perform the activity as  
  per instructions.  
  1.   Clamp the bar magnet horizontally on the stand.  
  2.   Touch the head of an iron nail to anyone end of the  
       magnet. It will be attracted and stick to the magnet.  
       Touch another iron nail to the lower end of the first  
       one, does it stick to it?  
       Yes,  it  will,  because  the  upper  nail  has  become  a  
       magnet itself. Go on hanging iron nail one by one to  
       make a chain until no more nails stay attached to the  
       chain.  
  3.   Try to hang steel nails at the other end of the bar  
       magnet to form a similar chain.  
  4.   Remove the chain of iron nails by pulling the topmost nail. Does the chain collapse?  
  5.   Remove the chain of steel nails in the same way. Does this collapse?  
       You will observe that the chain of iron nails immediately collapses but the steel nails  
       remain attached to each other for some time. This shows that the magnetism induced in  
       the iron nails is temporary while that in the steel nails is permanent.  

                                                       165  
  
﻿ 8.5 Magnetic Fields  
                                                                   
  

                                                                                                                        

              When   a   magnet   attracts   a   certain   magnetic  
material, it exerts some force to do so. Similarly, when it  
attracts or repels a magnetic pole of another magnet, it  
exerts a force on it. This force can be observed up to a  
certain distance from the magnet that can be explained  
by the concept of magnetic field around the magnet.  

  

     A magnetic field is the region around a magnet where  
     an  other  magnetic  object  experiences  a  force  on  it.  

  
              The  pattern  of  a  magnetic  field  around  a  bar  
magnet can be seen very easily by a simple experiment.                                                                                  Fig. 8.7                     

               If iron filings are sprinkled on a thin glass plate placed over a bar magnet,  
the filings become tiny magnets through magnetic induction. Now if the glass  
surface is gently tapped, the filings form a pattern. This pattern is known as the  
magnetic field pattern (Fig.8.5). This pattern can be better shown by lines that  
correspond to the path of the filings. These lines are called magnetic lines of  
force.  

Magnetic lines of Force  

  

              The  magnetic  lines of force around                                                        
a  bar  magnet  can  be  drawn  by  using  a                                                              

small compass. The needle of the compass                                                                  
will move along the magnetic lines of force.                                                              
Figure.  8.8  shows  the  magnetic  lines  of                                                             
force around a bar magnet drawn by this                                                                   
                                                                                                                          Fig. 8.8  
m e t h o d . T h e c o m p a s s n e e d l e  i s  
                                                                                                          
symbolized by an arrow being the north                                                                    
pole (Fig. 8.9).  
                                                                                                          

              The magnetic field at a point has both  
a magnitude and a direction.                                                                                                     Fig. 8.9  

                          The direction of the magnetic field at any point in space  
                          is the direction indicated by the N-pole of a magnetic  
                          compass needle placed at that point.  
                                                                                                                                                

                                                                               166  
  
﻿          Figure. 8.8 also shows that the field lines appear to originate from the  
north pole and end on the south pole.  Actually, the magnetic field extends in  
space all around the magnet but the figure shows the field in one plane only.  

  

Strength of the Magnetic Field  

          The  strength  of  the  magnetic  field  is  proportional  to  the  number  of  
magnetic lines of force passing through unit area placed perpendicular to the  
lines. Thus, the magnetic field is stronger in regions where the field lines are  
relatively close together and weaker where these are far apart. For example in  
Fig. 8.10, the lines are closest together near north and south poles indicating that  
the strength of the magnetic field is stronger in these regions. Away from the  
poles, the magnetic field becomes weaker.  

  

                                                             x  

               Fig. 8.10                                 Fig. 8.11                         Fig. 8.12  

          In case the two magnets are placed close to each other, their combined  
magnetic field can also be drawn by using the compass needle. Figure. 8.10 and  
Fig. 8.11 show the patterns of the combined magnetic field of two magnets  
lying with different orientations. In Fig. 8.11, point 'x' is called a neutral point  
because the field due to one magnet cancels out that due to the other magnet.  
Figure. 8.12 represents the field pattern of a horse-shoe magnet. The field is  
almost uniform between the poles except near the edges.  

  

8.6 Uses of Permanent Magnets  

          There are many uses of permanent magnets such as:  
1.        They are the essential parts of D.C motors, A.C and D.C electric generators.  
2.        Permanent magnets are used in the moving coil loud-speakers.  
3.        These are very commonly used in door catchers.  
4.        Magnetic strips are fitted to the doors of refrigerators and freezers to  
          keep the door closed tightly.  
5.        They are commonly used to separate iron objects from different mixtures.  
          Flourmills use permanent magnets to remove iron nails, etc. from the  
          grains before grinding.  

                                                      167  
  
﻿6.          In the medical field, they are used to remove iron splinters from the eyes.  
7.          A  piece  of  permanent  magnet  is  used  to  reset  the  iron  pointer  in  a  
            maximum and minimum thermometer.  

  

Applications of Permanent Magnets  

             Let us see, how some of the following devices use permanent magnets.  

  

A.C Generator                                                              Slip rings  
                                        
            When a coil is rotated between the   
                                                                                                                   I  
poles  of  a   permanent   magnet,  the  
magnetic  field  through  the  coil  changes  Carbon                                        I  
and an emf is induced between the ends of  brush                                                                           Carbon  
                                                                                                                           brush  
the  coil  (Fig.8.13).  On  connecting  these  
ends to an external circuit, an alternating                                                         I  

current  (A.C)  flows  through  the  circuit.                                                           B  
                                                                                       N                                     S  
Electric  motor  is the reverse process of                                                                 I  
electric generator. When an A.C is made to   
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                
                                                                           
pass through the coil between the poles of                                                                      Coil rotated by  
a permanent magnet, it starts rotating.                                       Permanent                         mechanical means  

                                                                                 magnet            Fig. 8.13  
Moving Coil Loudspeaker  
  
                                                                                                  
            A voice coil attached to the cone of   
                                                                                                                   
the speaker is slipped over one pole (N) of                                     Permanent                               Cone  
the radial permanent magnet as shown in                                            magnet              Voice  
                                                                                                        coil  
Fig. 8.14. From a microphone or some other                                               S        
sound signals in the form of varying (A.C)                                                        
                                                                                         N  
current passes through the voice coil that is                                                     
inserted in the gap of permanent magnet.                                                 S        
This A.C interacts with the magnetic field to                                                gap   
generate  a  varying  force  that  pushes  and                                                        Current  

pulls  on  the  voice  coil  and  the  attached                                                   Fig. 8.14  
cone. The cone vibrates back and forth to  
produce sound in the air.  

  

8.7 Electromagnets  
                                                        

            Electromagnets  are  also  a  kind  of  temporary  magnets.  The  following  
activity will show how electromagnets can be made and tested.  

                                                                  168  
  
﻿  Activity 5  

             The teacher should divide the students into groups and facilitate them  
  to perform this activity.  
                                                                                                                        Iron  
             Take a  battery of two cells, a                                         Thread                             Nail  
                                                                                                 
                                                               
  switch,   an   iron            nail,   cotton   (or                                                     Coil  
                                                               
   plastic) covered copper wire, thread                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                                                 
  and a few paper clips.                                       
                                                                          
                                                                                                 
             Wind the wire over the iron   
                                                                          
   nail to form a coil. Suspend the coil   
                                                                                                 
                                                               
                                                                          
   by means of thread tied to its centre.                                      Switch                 Battery  
  Connect  ends  of  the  wire  to  the   
                                                                 Clips  
   battery through the switch as shown  
  in the figure.  

              Keeping the switch OFF, bring some paper clips near to one end of the  
   nail. Do they stick to the nail? Now turn the switch ON and again bring the  
   paper clips near to the end of the nail. Do they stick this time? Does the nail  
   behave like a magnet? Yes, the nail has become a magnet. Turn the switch OFF  
   and see what happens to the clips. Do they fall down? What do you conclude  
   from this activity?  

  

           An iron nail or a rod becomes a magnet when an electric current  
           passes through a coil of wire around it. It is called an electromagnet.  

           When an electric current passes through the coil of wire, magnetic field is  
produced inside the coil that magnetizes the iron nail. As we have observed that  
the  magnetic  properties  of  an  electromagnet  are  temporary,  therefore,  iron  
object remains a magnet as long as the electric current passes through the coil.  
When the current is stopped, it no longer remains a magnet.  
           If we increase the number of cells in the battery or increase the number of  
turns of the coil, we will observe that the strength of the magnetic field in each  
case increases. This will be indicated by the more number of clips held by the nail  
in these cases.  

  

Uses of Electromagnets  

           Electromagnets  are  used  in  electric  bell,  telephone  receiver,  simple  
magnetic  relay,  circuit  breaker,  reed  switches,  cranes,  tape  recorder,  maglev  
trains and many other devices. Functions of some of them are described below:  

                                                              169  
  
﻿Magnetic Relay  
                                     

            This is a type of switch which works with an electromagnet. It is an input  
circuit which works with a low current for safety purpose. When it is turned ON it  
activates another circuit which works with a high current.  
            The input circuit supplies a small current to electromagnet. It attracts the  
iron armature which is pivoted. The other end of the armature moves up and  
pushes the metal contacts to join together which turn the high current-circuit  
ON (Fig.8.15).  
                                                                                                    Springy metal  
                                             
               To high                          Insulator                                           contracts  
               current circuit  
                                                                                                     Pivot  
  

                                                                                                  Iron armature  
                      Electromagnet  
  

                                              
                           Low current                                  
                           input circuit                Fig. 8.15         Soft iron core             
                                      
  

Circuit Breaker  
                                     

            A circuit breaker is designed to pass a certain maximum current through it  
safely. If the current becomes excessive, it switches OFF the circuit. Thus, electric  
appliances are protected from burning. As shown in Fig.8.16, inside a circuit  
breaker, the current flows along a copper strip, through the iron armature and  
coil of the electromagnet. The electromagnet attracts the armature. If the current  
is large enough, the armature is detached from the copper strip and the circuit  
breaks.                                                          Armature                Pivot      Spring  
                         Copper Strip  
  
                         Current          Switch  
                                        contacts  
  
  
  
                                      Coil  
  
                                   around  
  
                                  iron core  
                                                                                         Plastic  
                                                                                         frame  
                          Current  
  
  
  
                                                           Fig. 8.16  

                                                                 170  
  
﻿Telephone Receiver                                                      Electromagnet   
                                                                                                            Diaphragm  
            There  is  an  iron  diaphragm  in  the                                           
receiver  under  which  an  electromagnet  is                                                 
placed  (Fig.8.17).  The  microphone  of  the                                                 
                                                                                              
telephone  handset  on  the  other  side  sends  
                                                                                              
varying electric current in accordance with the  
sound  signals.   When   the   varying  current                                               
                                                                                                                          Varying  
passes  through  the  coil  of  receiver  on  this                                                                        current  
side,  it  causes  variation  in  the  force  of                                                         Fig. 8.17  

electromagnet.  As  a  result,  the  diaphragm  over  it  moves  back  and  forth  to  
produce sound.  
  For Your Information!  
  
             A    w o  n d e  r f  u  l    u s e    o f  
  
 electromagnets   can   be   seen   in   the  
  
 Maglev trains. The maglev stands for a  
  
 magnetically  levitated  train.  A  maglev  
  
 uses  forces  that  arise  from  induced  
  
 magnetism  to  levitate  or  float  a  few  
  
 centimetres above the guideway. That is  
  
 why, it does  not  need wheels and faces   Guideway                     Rail  
  
 no  friction.  In  Japan,  it  is  known  as  a                                    Arm  
  
 bullet train that can run up to a speed of  
  
 400 km per hour.                                                       Levitation        
  
             As  described  above,  magnetic                           electromagnet  
  
 levitative only lifts the train and does not                                          Guideway  
                                                                 (a)                                              (b)  
 move   it  forward.  To   push  the  train  
  
  forward, propulsion electromagnets are installed along the guideway and train. By push and  
 pull of these magnets the train moves forward.  
  

Electromagnetic Cranes  
            Huge  electromagnets  are  used  in  
  cranes at scrapyards, steel works and on  
  
  ships. These are so powerful that they can  
  lift iron and steel objects such as cars as  
  shown in Fig.8.18. After moving the heavy  
  objects   to   the   required   position,   the  
  
objects are released by just  switching OFF  
  the current of the electromagnet.  
                                                                                                   Fig. 8.18  
                                                                 171  
  
﻿8. 8 Domain Theory of Magnetism   
                                                                               
           It  is  observed  that  the  magnetic                               
field  of  a  bar  magnet  is  like  the  field                                
produced by a solenoid (long coil of wire)  
                                                                               
carrying   current   (Fig.   8.19-a   &   b).   It  
suggests that all magnetic effects are due                                     
to  moving  charges.  In  case  of  solenoid,                                            Fig. 8.19(a)  
                                                                         
charges   are   moving   in   the   wire.   The                                
                                                                               
motion responsible for the magnetism in a                                
                                                                               
magnet  is  due  to  electrons  within  the                                    
                                                                         
atoms of the material.  
                                                                                                     Current  
           We  know  that  an  electron  is  a                                           Fig. 8.19(b)  

charged  particle. Also, each electron in an atom is  revolving about the  nucleus  
and at the same time, it is spinning about an axis through it. The rotation and spin  
both give rise to a magnetic field. Since there are many electrons in an atom, their  
rotations  and  spins  may  be  so  oriented  to  strengthen  the  magnetic  effects  
mutually or to cancel the effects of one another.  If an atom has some resultant  
magnetic field, it behaves like a tiny magnet. It is called a magnetic dipole.  

  

Paramagnetic Materials  

           If the orbital and spin axes of the electrons in an atom are so oriented that  
their fields support one another and the atom behaves like a tiny magnet, the  
materials with such atoms are called paramagnetic materials such as aluminium  
and lithium.  

  

Diamagnetic Materials  

           Magnetic  fields  produced  by  both  orbital  and  spin  motions  of  the  
electrons in an atom may add up to Zero. In this case, the atom has no resultant  
field. The  materials with such atoms are called diamagnetic  materials. Some of  
their examples are copper, bismuth, water, etc.  

  

Ferromagnetic Materials  

           There are some solid substances such as iron, steel, nickel, cobalt, etc. in  
which cancellation of any type does not occur for large groups of neighbouring  
atoms of the order of 10¹⁶  because they have electron spins that are naturally  
aligned parallel to each other. These are known as ferromagnetic materials.  

                                                            172  
  
﻿            The group of atoms in this type of material form a region of about 0.1 mm  
size that is highly magnetized. This region is called a magnetic domain. Each  
domain behaves as a small magnet with its own north and south poles.  

  

Alignment of Domains  

  

            The  domains  in  a  ferromagnetic  material  are   

randomly oriented as shown in Fig.8.20 (a). The magnetic  
                                                                                                      
fields of the domains cancel each other so the material                                                          Fig. 8.20(a)                 
                                                                                                        
does   not  display  any   magnetism.  However,  an   
unmagnetized  piece  of  iron  can  be  magnetized  by   
placing  it  in  an  external  magnetic  field  provided  by  a   

permanent magnet or an electromagnet.  
                                                                                                      
            The   external   magnetic   field   penetrates   the                                                Fig. 8.20(b)                   
                                                                                                        
unmagnetized iron and induces magnetism in it by causing two effects on the  
domains. Those domains whose magnetism is parallel or nearly parallel to the  
external magnetic field grow in size at the expense of other domains that are not  
oriented. In addition, the magnetic alignment of the other domains rotates and  
become oriented in the direction of the external field (Fig.8.20-b). As a result, the  
iron is  magnetized and  behaves  like a  magnet  having its own  north and south  

poles.  
                                                                                                  For Your Information!  
             In soft iron, the domains are easily oriented on  
                                                                                                  The magnetism induced in a  
applying  an  external  field  and  return  to  random  
                                                                                                  ferromagnetic  material  can  
position when the field is removed. This is desirable in   be surprisingly large in the  
an  electromagnet  and  also  in  transformers.  On  the   presence  of  weak  external  
other hand, steel is not so easily oriented to change  field. In some cases, induced  
order. It requires very strong external field, but once  field  is  a  thousand  times  
                                                                                                  stronger  than  the  external  
oriented, retains the alignment. That is why, steel is  field. That is why, high field  
used to make permanent magnets.                                                                   electromagnets   are   made  
             In   non-ferromagnetic   materials,   such   as   by using cores of soft iron of  
aluminium  and  copper,  the  formation  of  magnetic   some  other  ferromagnetic  
                                                                                                  material.  
domains  does  not  occur,  so  magnetism  cannot  be  
induced into these substances.  

  

8.9 Magnetization and Demagnetization  

            There are two methods used for magnetizing a steel bar:  
 1.         Stroking  
             In this method, magnetism is induced in a steel bar by using the magnetic  
field of a permanent magnet. The steel bar can be stroked in two ways:  

                                                                    173  
  
﻿                                                                                         
(a)         Single Touch Method                                                             
                                                                                            
A steel bar is placed on a horizontal surface. It is                                     
stroked from one end to the other several times                                            Permanent  
                                                                                           magnet  
in the same direction using the same pole (say                                              
N)  of  the  permanent  magnet.  Every  time  the                                           
magnet is lifted up sufficiently high on reaching                                           
the other end of the bar (Fig. 8.21).                                                                    Fig. 8.21  
(b)         Double Touch Method                                                                Permanent           Permanent  
                                                                                            
            In this method, stroking is done from the                                          magnet              magnet  
                                                                                            
centre of the steel bar onwards with the unlike  
                                                                                            
poles of two permanent magnets at the same                                                  
time (Fig. 8.22). This method is more efficient                                             
                                                                                                          Steel bar  
than the first one.  
                                                                                                         Fig. 8.22  
In both the cases, the poles produced at the ends  
                                                                                            
of magnetized steel bar after stroking are of the                                           
opposite polarity to that of the stroking pole.                                             
2.          Making a Magnet using Solenoid                                                  

            In  this   method,  a  steel   bar  to  be  
magnetised is placed inside a solenoid (long coil  
of  wire)  as  shown  in  Fig.  8.23.  The  solenoid                                            -                                +  
                                                                                             Current                        Current  
should  have several  hundred turns of insulated                                                                                         
                                                                                                         Fig. 8.23  
copper  wire.  When  direct  current  is  passed  
 through  the  solenoid,  the steel bar  becomes  a  magnet.  The  polarity  of  the  
magnetised  steel  bar  is  found  by  applying  Right  hand  Grip  rule  which  is  
stated as:  

  

                     Grip the solenoid with the right hand such that fingers  
                     are curled along the direction of current (positive to the  
                     negative terminal of the battery) in the solenoid, then  
                     the thumb points to the N-pole of the bar end.  

  

Demagnetisation of Magnets  
                                                                                                             
1.          Heating                                                                                          
            Thermal  vibrations  tend  to  disturb  the  order  of  the   
domain. Therefore, if we heat a magnet strongly, the magnet   
loses its magnetism very quickly (Fig. 8.24).                                                                    Fig. 8.24  

                                                                  174  
  
﻿2.          Hammering  
            If  we  beat  a  magnet,  the  domains  lose  their  
alignment and the magnet is demagnetised. It is also  
called hammering (Fig. 8.25).                                                                                                          
                                                                                                            Fig. 8.25  

  
3.          Alternating Current                                                                   
            When  an  alternating  current  (A.C)  is  flowing   
                                                                                                 

through a long solenoid, a magnet moved out slowly   
from inside of the solenoid is demagnetised (Fig. 8.26).                                                   AC  
                                                                                                           Fig. 8.26  

  

8.10 Applications of Magnets in Recording Technology  
                                                                                                                                         

            Electromagnets  have  widely  used  in  recording  technology  of  sound,  
video  and  data  in  the  form  of  electrical  signals  through  magnetization  of  a  
magnetic  material.  Most common  magnetic  recording  mediums are magnetic  
tapes and disk recorders which are used not only to reproduce audio and video  
signals but also to store computer data. These materials are usually coated with  
iron oxide. Some other recordings mediums are magnetic drums, ferrite cores  
and  magnetic  bubble  memory.  We  will  discuss  the  process  of  magnetic  
recording on tapes and disks in some detail.  

  

Magnetic Tape Recording  

  

            Induced  magnetism  is  used  in  the    
process  of   magnetic  tape   recording.    
                                                                                 A.C  
Recording and playing head is a coil of wire    
wrapped around an iron core. The iron core    
                                                                                                                      Recording  
                                                                                
has a horse-shoe shape with a narrow gap in                                                                           head  
                                                                                
between its two ends. Audio and video tapes  Magnetic                                                                       Tape  
                                                                              coating                                       travel  
are  synthetic  tapes  coated  with  a  layer  of    
ferromagnetic material.                                                         Plastic backing              Fringe field penetrates  

                                                                                                             magnetic coating  
            Sound  or  picture  is  converted  into    
electrical  forms  as  varying  currents.  These    
currents are sent to the head that becomes an    
                                                                                                   N    S  
electromagnet with a N-pole at one end and    
a S-pole at the other end. The magnetic field                                                Induced  
                                                                                             magnetism  
lines pass through the iron core and cross the  
                                                                                                Fig. 8.27  

                                                                 175  
  
﻿gap. Some of the field lines in the gap curved outward as shown in Fig. 8.27. The  
curved part of the magnetic field called as fringe  field  penetrates magnetic  
coating on the moving tape and induces magnetism in the coating. This induced  
magnetism is retained when the tape leaves the vicinity of the recording head.  
The  reverse  process  changes  the  varying  induced  magnetism  into  varying  
current that onward is converted into sound or picture.  

  

Hard Disk Recording  

  

            Hard  disks  are  circular  flat  plates                               Rotating                      
made of aluminium, glass or plastic and                                            magnetic                         Read/write  
                                                                                                                       head  
                                                                                      disk      
coated on both sides with iron oxide. Hard  
                                                                           
                                                                                                
disks can store terabyte of information.                                                        
                                                                              Voice coil  
            A   magnetic   head   is  a  small                                                  
                                                                              positioner  
electromagnet which writes a  binary digit                                                      
(1 or 0) by magnetizing tiny spots on the                                                       
spinning  disk  in  different  directions  and                                                  
                                                                                                
reads digit by detecting the magnetization                                                      
direction of spots (Fig. 8.28). The term hard  
                                                                                                
disk is also used to refer to the whole of a                                                     Fig. 8.28  
computer's internal data storage.  
            Magnetic disk devices have an advantage over tapes recorders. A disk unit  
has the ability to read or write a recording instantly while locating a desired  
information on tape may take many minutes.  
            Electronic  devices  can  be  protected  from  strong  magnetic  effects  by  
enclosing them in the boxes made of soft iron. We will describe it in detail in the  
next section.  

  
                                                                                                     Soft iron casing  
8.11 Soft Iron as Magnetic Shield  

            S o f t i r o n h a s h i g h  m a g n e t i c  
permeability. The permeability is the ability  
of a material to allow the magnetic flux or                                                           Sensitive  
                                                                                                     instrument  
lines of force through it when the material is  
placed inside a magnetic field. When a piece  
of  soft  iron  is  put  into  a  magnetic  field,  it  
generates  a   magnetic  fi eld  due  to  
                                                                                                                                          
magnetization.                                                                                External magnetic field  

                                                                                                    Fig. 8.29  

                                                                  176  
  
﻿            If a sensitive magnetic device is enclosed in a casing of soft iron, the  
magnetic flux gets established in the soft iron rather than the device. Thus, the  
device is shielded from external magnetic field.  
            Figure 8.29 can explain this phenomenon well. A soft iron casing (shell) is  
placed inside a magnetic field produced by opposite poles of two bar magnets.  
Since the magnetic permeability of the iron shell is higher than that of air, so the  
magnetic flux is established in the soft iron. As a result, the device is protected  
from the magnetic field. Usually, the casing is  made with rounded corners to  
facilitate the magnetic field line up easily.  
            Soft   iron   is  generally   used   in  the  cores   of  transformers   and  
electromagnets because of its high permeability. In case of an electromagnet,  
the core of soft iron can be easily magnetized when current is passed around it  
and quickly lost when current is stopped. That is why, electromagnets are widely  
used in electric bells, loud speakers, picking and releasing  iron scraps by the  
cranes  and  in  many  more  appliances.  The  sensitivity  of  a  moving  coil  
galvanometer is also increased by placing a soft iron core inside the coil.  

                                                        KEY POINTS  

       Magnets can attract magnetic materials even if they are not in direct contact with them.  
      A magnet has two poles; north pole and south pole. Like poles repel and unlike poles  
       attract each other.  
      To get an isolated magnetic pole is not possible.  
      Temporary magnets work only in the presence of a magnetic field, whereas permanent  
        magnets retain their magnetic properties forever.  
      A magnetic field is the region around a magnet where a magnetic object experiences a  
       force on it.  
      A magnetic field at a point has both a magnitude and a direction.  
      The strength of the magnetic field is proportional to the number of magnetic lines of  
       force passing through unit area placed perpendicular to the lines.  
       Permanent  magnets  are  used  in  electric  motors,  electric  generators,  moving  coil  
        loudspeakers, separating iron objects from different mixtures etc.  
       Electromagnets are temporary magnets. They are used in electric bells, magnetic relays,  
       circuit breakers, telephone receivers, electromagnetic cranes, etc.  
      The materials in which fields due to orbital and spins motion of the electrons in the atoms  
       support each other are called paramagnetic materials.  
      The materials in which fields due to orbital and spin motions of the electrons in the atoms  
       add up to zero are called diamagnetic materials.  
      The materials in which large groups of atoms of the order of  1016  have their electrons spin  

       naturally aligned parallel to each other are called ferromagnetic materials. These groups  
       are called magnetic domains.  
      The  external  magnetic  field  penetrates  the  ferromagnetic  material  and  aligns  all  the  
       domains to make it a magnet.  

                                                                177  

  
﻿        Steel bars are magnetised by stroking, single and double touch sliding with permanent  
         magnets or keeping them in a very strong magnetic field inside a solenoid through which  
         large current is passed.  
        Magnets can be demagnetised by heating, hitting or drawing through a solenoid in which  
         A.C current is passed.  
        Electromagnets are widely used in recording technology. Such recording mediums are  
         audio/video magnetic tapes, hard disks of computers and other data storing devices.  
        Soft iron is also used to protect sensitive magnetic device from external magnetic fields.  

                                                                    EXERCISE  

  A         Multiple Choice Questions  
                                                                                                                                                                    
             Tick () the correct answer.  
8.1           Which one of the following is not a magnetic material?  
              (a) Cobalt                                                               (b) Iron  
              (c) Aluminium                                                            (d) Nickel  
8.2           Magnetic lines of force:  
              a) are always directed in a straight line  
              (b) cross one another  
              (c) enter into the north pole  
              (d) enter into the south pole  
8.3           Permanent magnets cannot be made by:  
              (a) soft iron                (b) steel                                   (c) neodymium                           (d) alnico  
8.4           Permanent magnets are used in:  
              (a) circuit breaker                                                      (b) loudspeaker  
              (c) electric crane                                                       (d) magnetic recording  
8.5           A common method used to magnetise a material is:  
              (a) stroking  
              (b) hitting  
              (c) heating  
              (d) placing inside a solenoid having A.C current  
8.6            A magnetic compass is placed around a bar magnet at four points as  
              shown  in  figure  below.  Which  diagram  would  indicate  the  correct  
              directions of the field?  

  

                                                                                                                                                     
  

         N                S                        N                S                        N                S                        N                S  
                                                                                                                                                                   
  

                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                     
                 (a)                                      (b)                                       (c)                                       (d)   

                                                                              178  
  
﻿8.7           A steel rod is magnetised by double touch stroking method. Which one  
             would be the correct polarity of the AB magnet?  
  

                                                                                                               Permanent  
                                                                                                                                   Permanent  
                                                                                                               magnet              magnet  
  
  N              S       S              N         N       S S       N         S       N  N     S         
                                                                                                         
                     
                                                                              
        (a)                    (b)                       (c)                        (d)                  
                                                                                                            A                                   B  
                                                                                                                         Steel bar  

8.8          The best material to protect a device from external magnetic field is:  
             (a) wood                  (b) plastic                               (c) steel               (d) soft iron  

  

  B        Short Answer Questions  

8.1          What are temporary and permanent magnets?  
8.2          Define magnetic field of a magnet.  
8.3          What are magnetic lines of force?  
8.4          Name some uses of permanent magnets and electromagnets.  
8.5          What are magnetic domains?  
8.6          Which type of magnetic field is formed by a current-carrying long coil?  
8.7          Differentiate between paramagnetic and diamagnetic materials.  
  

  C        Constructed Response Questions  
                                                                                                                                   P  
8.1          Two bar magnets are stored in a wooden box. Label   

                                                                                                                                                
             the  poles  of  the  magnets  and  identify  P  and  Q                                                            

             objects.  
8.2          A steel bar has to be magnetised by placing it inside   

             a solenoid such that end A of a bar becomes N-pole  
                                                                                                                                  Q  
             and end B becomes S-pole. Draw circuit diagram of   
                                                                                                                 A                                  B  
             solenoid showing steel bar inside it.                                                                            Steel bar  

  
8.3          Two bar magnets are lying as shown in the figure. A compass is placed at  
             the middle of the gap. Its needle settles in the north-south direction. Label  
             N and S poles of the magnets. Justify your answer by drawing fields lines.  

  

                                                                         179  
  
﻿8.4       Electric  current  or  motion  of  electrons  produce  magnetic  field.  Is  the  
          reverse  process  true,  that  is  the  magnetic  field  gives  rise  to  electric  
          current? If yes, give an example and describe it briefly.  

8.5       Four similar solenoids are placed in a circle  
          as shown in the figure. The magnitude of  
                                                                                         D  
          current in all of them should be the same.  
          Show by diagram, the direction of current in  
                                                                                                        C  
          each  solenoid  such  that  when  current  in  
          anyone solenoid is switched OFF, the net                             A             O  

          magnetic field at the centre O is  directed  
          towards that solenoid. Explain your answer.  
                                                                                                 B  
  
  

 D      Comprehensive Questions  

8.1       How  can  you  identify  whether  an  object  is  a  magnet  or  a  magnetic  
          material?  
8.2       Describe the strength of a magnetic field in terms of magnetic lines of  
          force. Explain it by drawing a few diagrams for the fields as examples.  
8.3       What is a circuit breaker? Describe its working with the help of a diagram.  
8.4       A magnet attracts only a magnet. Explain the statement.  
8.5       Differentiate  between  paramagnetic,  diamagnetic  and  ferromagnetic  
          materials with reference to the domain theory.  
8.6       Why ferromagnetic materials are suitable for making magnets?  

                                                      180  
  
