Contents Ba’
States of Matter and Phase Changes
Atomic Structure
Chemical Bonding
Stoichiometry
Energetics
Equilibria
Acid Base Chemistry
Periodic Table and Periodicity
Group Properties and Elements
Environmental Chemistry
Hydrocarbons
Empirical Data Collection and Analysis
Laboratory and Practical Skills
Glossary
Index
Bibliography
[Chapter 1]
Student Learning Outcomes
r After studying this chapter, students will be able to:
Define chemistry as the study of matter, its properties, composition, and interactions
with other matter and energy.
Or Study of earth (solids), Air (gases), Sea (liquids) and
Sky (plasma) and their interaction with each other.
— Explain with examples that chemistry has many sub-fields and interdisciplinary fields.
Some examples include:
Biochemistry
Medicinal Chemistry
Polymer Chemistry
Geochemistry
Environmental Chemistry
Analytical Chemistry
Physical Chemistry
Organic Chemistry
Inorganic Chemistry
Nuclear Chemistry
Astrochemistry
Define matter as a substance having mass and occupying space.
State the distinguishing macroscopic properties of commonly observed states of
solids, liquids and gases in particular density, compressibility
and fluidity.
Identify that state is a distinct form of matter (examples could include familiarity with
plasma, intermediate states and exotic states e .g., BEC or liquid crystals)
— Explain the allotropic forms of solids (some examples may include diamond, graphite,
and fullerenes)
Explain the difference between elements, compounds and mixtures
Identify solutions, colloids, and suspensions as mixtures and give an example of each
Explain the effect of temperature on solubility and formation of unsaturated and
saturated solutions
[Topic 1.1 What is Chemistry?]
Chemistry is the branch of science which deals with the properties,
composition and the structure of substances.
It also deals with the physical and
chemical changes in matter and the laws or principles which govern these
changes.
Determination of composition represents finding out percentages of
elements and compounds in a sample of matter.
Structure of matter means the
arrangement of atoms in matter.
Both physical and chemical changes may be
brought about by absorption or evolution of energy.
Branches of Chemistry
To understand the widely spread complex subject of chemistry and to
concentrate on its specific aspects, chemistry is divided into many distinct
branches.
These branches have distinct areas of study for the scientists to focus
on and to achieve breakthroughs and advancements.
1.Physical Chemistry
This branch investigates how substances behave at atomic and molecular
levels.
It provides clear explanation as to how fundamental physical laws
governing our world cause atoms and molecules to show specific characteristics
and in turn react to give huge structures related to life.
Physical chemistry is also
used to predict and change the rates of reactions and thus optimize the
conditions to carry out the reactions on industrial scale.
2.
Inorganic Chemistry
It is the study of the synthesis, composition, properties and structure of
elements and compounds that contain little or no carbon.
An inorganic
substance can be composed of metals, nonmetals or a mixture of these, salts,
acids and bases.
Inorganic compounds are used as fertilizers, medicines,
catalysts, pigments, coatings and much more.
3.
Organic Chemistry
It is the branch of chemistry that deals with the carbon compounds
(hydrocarbons and their derivatives) other than its simple salts like carbonates,
bicarbonates, oxides and carbides.
In this branch, we study the structure,
formation, properties, composition and reactions of carbon containing
compounds.
Organic compounds are found in all forms of life and are also
essential for life.
4.
Environmental Chemistry
It is the scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that
occur in this planet.
In this subject, we study the sources, reactions, effects and
fates of chemical species in the air, soil and water environments.
Without this, it
would be impossible to study the effects that humans have on the environment
through the release of chemicals.
It helps in understanding the causes, effects
and solutions of different types of pollution.
5.
Analytical Chemistry
This branch of chemistry deals with the analysis of different substances.
It
involves separation, identification and determination of the concentration of the
components present in material things.
Nowadays the field of analytical
chemistry generally involves the use of modern and sophisticated instruments to
analyze the matter.
6.
Biochemistry
It is the branch of chemistry in which we understand life through chemical
processes.
It is the study of chemical substances and vital processes occurring in
living organisms.
Biochemistry provides insights into the structure and function
of molecules such as proteins, carbohydrates, lipids and nucleic acids.
7.
Nuclear Chemistry
Nuclear chemistry deals with the reactions taking place in the nucleus of
an atom.
It deals with radioactivity, nuclear processes and transformation in the
nuclei of atoms.
Nuclear chemistry has many applications in agriculture,
medicine, industry and research.
8.
Polymer Chemistry
Polymers are large molecules made by linking together a series of
building blocks.
Polymer chemistry focuses on the properties, structure and
synthesis of polymers and macromolecules.
Many materials present in the living
organisms including proteins, cellulose and nucleic acids are naturally occurring
polymers.
9.
Geochemistry
The study of chemical composition of Earth and its sources and minerals is
called geochemistry.
Apart from its use in minerals exploration, geochemical
mapping today has applications in environmental monitoring, forestry and
medical research.
\ul
yy,
Geothermal heat pump uses a pump to transfer underground water into the
buildings during the winter
to heat them and in the summer to cool them.
10.
Medicinal Chemistry
In this branch of chemistry, the chemist tries to design and synthesize
medicines or drugs which are beneficial for mankind.
It includes the discovery,
delivery, absorption and metabolism of drugs in human body.
11.
Astrochemistry
It is the study of molecules and ions recurring in space and interstellar
space.
In this discipline we study the abundance and reactions of atoms,
molecules and ions in the universe and interaction of these species with radiation.
A lunar mission has recently brought samples from the Moon.
The following
experiments were then carried out on it.
Point out the branch of chemistry
these experiments are related to.
Experiment
Branch of Chemistry
Determining its composition
Studying the physical properties
of materials
itcontains
3.
Carrying out chemical reactions
with usual inorganic reagents
[Topic 1.2 States of Matter]
This world is made up of matter and energy.
Energy is non-material in
nature.
Anything other than energy which carries weight and occupies volume is
called matter.
We encounter material things everywhere in all sorts of different
and distinct forms.
A state of matter is one of the many distinct forms in which matter can
exist.
We observe four states of matter in everyday life: solid, liquid, gas and
plasma.
Apart from these, there are more states of matter which we do not see in
our everyday life.
a
The three primary states of matter are the solid, liquid and gaseous.
They
are different from each other due to different strength of intermolecular forces,
the arrangement of particles and the distance between the particles .
In
gases, molecules are very widely apart with no order whatsoever and very weak
intermolecular forces.
All these features make gases easily compressible.
Their
densities are obviously very low.
The liquids, on the other hand, have molecules which are closely attached
but moving randomly.
There exists significant intermolecular forces between
their molecules.
Liquids are therefore not easily compressible and their densities
have higher values than those ofgases.
Solids have a definite shape and a fixed volume.
Particles in solids are
closely packed and have very strong interatomic or intermolecular attractions.
The particles in solids remain fixed at their positions where they can oscillate
about their mean positions.
Solids are relatively incompressible and rigid.
The densities of solids are very high.
Solids are the only state of matter
which do not need any container to be stored.
In crystalline solids, particles are
perfectly arranged and strongly bonded.
This makes them almost
incompressible.
They are the most dense substances.
Plasma is not so generally seen form of matter.
It is composed of particles
with very high kinetic energy.
It exists in fluorescent tubes, lightning and welding
arcs.
Plasma can be considered as a partially ionized gas containing electrons,
ions, photons, etc.
Matter also exits in intermediate states where liquid meets gas and liquid
meets solid, for example supercritical fluids, liquid crystals and graphene.
Supercritical fluids are highly compressed states which show both properties of
gases and liquids.
Chemical reactions which may not be carried out in
conventional solvents, may possibly be carried out in supercritical carbon
dioxide.
So
liquid
States of Matter
bad
gas
Liquid crystal is a state of matter whose properties are between those of
conventional liquids and those of crystalline solids.
Liquid crystals are used in
display devices including computer monitors, clocks, watches and navigation
systems.
Graphene is an example of two-dimensional crystal, a single layer of
carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal pattern.
Graphene is a tough, flexible and
light material with a high resistance .
States of matter that are not commonly encountered are called exotic
states of matter.
Examples are dark matter, Bose-Einstein condensate, nuclear
matter, quantum spin liquid and many others.
[Topic 1.3 Element, Compound and Mixture]
Matter in this world exists in the form of elements, compounds and
mixtures.
Element is the simplest form of matter.
It is a pure substance
containing the same kind of atoms.
It cannot be broken down into simpler
substances by ordinary chemical reactions.
Elements exist in all three forms;
solid, liquid and gas.
Most of the elements found in this world exist in solid form.
Liquid and gaseous elements are very few in number as compared to solids, .
Elements may be a metal, a non-metal, a metalloid and a noble gas.
Elements can also exist in the form of atoms, molecules, ions and isotopes.
Examples of important elements are sodium, potassium, magnesium, calcium,
carbon, silicon, nitrogen, oxygen, chlorine, helium, copper, gold, zinc, silver,
nickel, cobalt, mercury, bromine and iodine, etc.
Compound is also a pure substance.
It is made up of two or more different
chemically elements combined in a fixed ratio.
When elements come together,
they react with each other and form chemical bonds that are not easy to break,
Compounds may be molecular, ionic, intermetallic and coordination
complexes.
Compounds may also be inorganic and organic in nature.
Examples
of important compounds are water, anmonia, methane, carbon dioxide, sodium
carbonate, potassium chloride, starch, proteins, carbohydrates, mineral acids,
organic acids, etc.
The composition and properties of an element or a compound are
uniform throughout a given sample and from one sample to another.
A mixture
is formed when more than one types of elements or compounds are mixed
together in any ratio.
Air, soil, milk and tap water are everyday examples of
mixtures.
A mixture may be homogeneous or heterogeneous.
A solution of salt
and water is an example of homogeneous mixture because its concentration is
uniform throughout.
A sample of rock is an example of heterogeneous mixture
because the concentration of its constituents is different in its different parts.
Rocks are composed of different types of minerals such as granite, mica and
limestone, .
\\l
~(_)
Interesting Information! \
Many elements are found in nature but some are artificial.
Technetium was
first element created by scientists in the laboratory.
eee
: Mixtures
[Topic 1.4 Allotropic Forms of Substances]
Elements may exist in more than one structural forms which can exhibit
quite different physical and chemical properties.
These forms are called
allotropic forms and phenomenon is called allotropy.
Element oxygen exists in
two allotropic forms namely oxygen (O2) and ozone (Os).
Similarly, carbon exists in three main allotropic forms, diamond, graphite
and Buckminster fullerene.
Diamond has a giant macromolecular structure
whereas graphite has a layered structure of hexagonal rings of carbon.
Buckminster fullerene (Ceo) consists of spheres made of atoms arranged in
pentagons and hexagons.
Fullerenes are stable at high temperatures and high
pressures.
Being covalent in nature, they are soluble in organic solvents.
The
fullerene structure is unique in that the molecule is not charged, has no
boundaries and has no unpaired electrons.
They have a cage like structure.
Fullerene C,, has a low melting point.
It is soft and cannot conduct electricity.
Element sulphur also exists in two crystalline allotropic forms i.e. rhombic and
monocline; the former is more stable than the latter, .
Buckminsterfullerene
Graphite
Rhombic Sulphur
Monoclimic Sulphur
[Topic 1.5 Differences between Elements, Compounds and Mixtures]
Compounds
Elements
Mixtures
An element is the
A compound is a pure
Mixture is an impure
simplest form of matter.
substance.
It is formed
compound.
A sample of
It is a pure substance
by the chemical
matter having more
containing the same
combination of two or
than one type of
kind of atoms.
more atoms of different
elements or compounds
elements.
mixed together in any
ratio, is called a mixture.
It is not possible to
In
break down an element
atoms of elements must
mixture retains its
into simpler particles by
combine together by a
identity and specific
ordinary chemical
fixed ratio by weight.
For
properties.
reactions.
example, in water (H20)
a
compound, the
Each component of a
hydrogen and oxygen
are present in a fixed
ratio of 1:8 by weight.
When an element exists
It is possible to break a
A mixture may be
in the form of atoms, it
compound into its
homogeneous or
is represented by a
constituent elements
heterogeneous.
For
symbol.
For example,
by a chemical reaction.
example, the solution of
sodium and calcium are
For example, ammonia
common salt in water is
represented by their
can be converted back
a homogeneous mixture
symbols Na and Ca.
to nitrogen and
while a sample of rock is
hydrogen by a suitable
a heterogeneous
chemical reaction.
mixture.
Gaseous elements exist
The properties of a
The components of a
in the form of
compound are always
mixture are not
independent molecules,
different from the
chemically bound
for example, nitrogen
elements from which it is together and they can
(Nz), oxygen (Oz) and
formed.
For example, the be separated by
chlorine (Cl2).
Noble
properties of water are
gases, however, exist as
different from those of
mono atomic molecules. hydrogen and oxygen.
physical methods.
For example, helium
Compounds existinthe | The properties of a
(He) and argon (Ar).
form of molecules, for
mixture are the sum of
example hydrogen
those of its
chloride (HCl), ammonia
components.
(NH3) and water (H20).
Compounds may also
exist as network
arrangement oftheir
atoms.
For example, ionic
compounds like NaCl
and covalent compounds
like sand (SiO2).
| Exercise ] 1.
Which elements are found in pure state on Earth?
2.
Which elements are present in very small amounts on Earth?
[Topic 1.6 Solution, Colloidal Solutionand Suspension]
A solution is such a mixture in which solute particles are completely
homogenized in the solvent e.g. dissolution of sodium chloride or copper
sulphate in water.
The solute particles in such a solution cannot be seen by the
naked eye.
If solution is filtered, these particles pass through the pores of filter
paper leaving no residue.
Such a solution is called a true solution.
A suspension,
on the other hand, is a mixture in which solute particles do not dissolve in the
solvent.
We can actually see these particles.
If a suspension is kept for some time,
these particles settle down.
Again, if this suspension is filtered, the particles in it
cannot pass through the pores of filter paper and can be collected as a residue.
A
mixture of chalk in water is an example of suspension. .
a
————
Solution
Colloidal Solution
Suspension
Colloidal Solution and Suspension
Besides a true solution and a suspension, there is a third form of solution
called colloidal solution.
In this type, the solute particles do not homogenize with
solvent.
These particles are a little bit bigger than the solute particles present in
the true solution but not big enough to be seen with a naked eye like the particles
present in a suspension.
If kept for some time, the particles of a colloidal solution
do not settle down.
On filtration, these particles pass through the filter paper like
the particles of a true solution.
Starch solution and white of an egg are the
common examples of colloidal solutions.
[Topic 1.7 Formation of Unsaturated and Saturated Solutions]
Take about 100 g of water in a beaker, add to it 5g of table sugar, and stir it.
The sugar will dissolve in water.
Then add another 5g of sugar and stir.
This will
also dissolve.
This solution is called an unsaturated solution.
A solution which can
dissolve more amount of a solute at a particular temperature is called an
unsaturated solution.
Continue adding sugar in the above solution.
As the
quantity of sugar in water increases, its dissolution will become more difficult.
A
stage comes when no more sugar will dissolve in water at this temperature.
Any
more sugar added at this stage will settle down at the bottom of the beaker.
This
solution is called a saturated solution at a particular temperature of the process.
A solution in which the maximum amount of the solute has been
dissolved in a particular amount of a solvent at a particular temperature is called
a saturated solution.
Different solutes have different solubilities in a particular solvent.
For
example, if the solutions of table sugar and sodium chloride are prepared, it
is found that 36 g of sodium chloride can dissolvein 100 g of water at 20 C to
give a saturated solution.
Against this 203.9 g of table sugar can dissolve in
water at 20 C to give its saturated solution.
In other words, the solubility of
table sugarin water Is far greater than that of sodium chloride at 20 C.
Thisis
due to the fact that sugar molecules are larger than salt ions, so more water
molecules can surround a single sugar molecule, causing it to dissolve in
largeramounts.
a
I
Mixtures are closely related to our everyday lives.
The air we breathe, the
foods we generally consume, the fluids in our body, the solids like steel we use, are all
either homogeneous or heterogenous mixtures.
[Topic 1.8 Effect of Temperature on the Solubility of Solutes]
The solubility of a solute is the amount of solute which can dissolve in
100g ofa solvent at a particular temperature.
Change in temperature has different effects on the solubility of different
compounds.
Usually the solubility increases with the increase in temperature but
it cannot be taken as a general rule.
There are a large number of compounds
whose solubility in water increases with the increase in temperature e.g.
potassium nitrate (KNQs), silver nitrate (AgNO3) and potassium chloride (KCl) etc.
The solubility of sodium chloride in water does not increase appreciably with the
increase in temperature.
The solubility of compounds like lithium carbonate
(LixCO3) and calcium chromate (CaCrO,) decreases with the increase in
temperature.
The solubility of gases in water also decreases with the increase in
temperature, .
Similarly, the solubilities of copper sulphate and sodium nitrate also
increase with increase in the temperature.
However, the solubility of calcium
hydroxide decreases with the increase in temperature.
Solubility Curves
Solubility Curve of KNO,; in H,O
Oo 120
A
Tr 110
225-
& 100
ra)
6 200-
5 175 =
S
iy)
100 =
75-4
50-—
25-4
O
Supersaturated
Unsaturated
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Temperature C
Saturated
150-
T >
Temperature ( C)
Solubility Curves
Activity
Take 100 g of water in a beaker
and prepare saturated solution of
sugar at room temperature.
Heat the
beaker on a spirit lamp.
Add a
little
more sugar in it and stir it.
Will this
Saturated
solution of
Sugar
sugar be dissolved in it?
You will
notice that by heating the solution
the quantity of sugar dissolved in
water has increased i.e. the solubility
of sugar has increased.
How variation of solubility at different temperatures can be useful for us?
Interesting Information! \
1.
Theincrease in the solubility of solidsin liquids tyneyae
with increase in temperature may be used to
purify them.
Pure solids commonly appear as
beautifully shaped crystals.
Crystals of Potassium Nitrate
Generally the solubility of gases decreases with increase in temperature.
Carbon
dioxide gas is more soluble in water at low temperature.
Soda water bottles are
thus stored in the refrigerator to keep carbon dioxide gas dissolved in water fora
longer period of time.
Chemistry is that branch of science which deals with the composition of matter,
changes in matter and the laws which govern these changes.
To understand the vast and complex subject of Chemistry, it is divided into many
branches.
Physical chemistry, inorganic chemistry and organic chemistry are its main
branches among so many others.
Matter exists mainly in three states: solid, liquid and gas.
They are different from each
other due to different distances between the particles which they contain.
Plasma is regarded as the fourth state of matter which is not normally observed in this
world.
Most of the matter presentin the rest of the universe exists in this state.
Matter also exists in the intermediete states which are at the borderline of its two
principal states, between liquid and gas or between liquid and solid.
Supercritical
fluids and liquid crystals are some examples ofsuch states.
Matter exists in the form of distinct entites called elements, compounds and mixtures.
Elements, compounds and mixtures have distinct properties individually and they are
very different form one another.
Solutions, suspensions and colloidal solutions are different forms in which the
mixtures usually exist.
They have their own characteristic properties.
Different solutes have different solubilities in a particular solvent.
The solubility of a solute is the amount of solute which can dissolve in 100g of a
solvent at a particular temperature.
11.
Change in temperature has different effects on the solubility of different compounds.
‘Exercise Wap}
off]
‘Tick (v) the correct answer.
(i)
Matter is present in neon signs in the state of:
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(a)
Supercritical fluid
(b)
Plasma
(c)
Gas
(d)
Liquid crystal
Hazardous effects of shopping bags are studied in:
(a)
Geochemistry
(6b)
Inorganic Chemistry
(c)
Analytical Chemistry
(d)
Environmental Chemistry
| Theman-made polymer is:
(a)
Starch
(b)
Polystyrene
(c)
Protein
(d)
Cellulose
| Thecrystals of which substance has rhombic shape?
(a)
Brass
(6b) Sulphur
(c)
Graphite
(d) Bronze
= Which liquid amongthe following is a colloidal solution?
(a)
Milk
(c) Vinegar solution
(vi)
(b)
Slaked lime used for white wash
(d)
Mixture
of AgCl in water
| Which ofthe following is a heterogeneous mixture?
(a) Asolution of calcium hydroxide in water
(vii)
(b)
Asolution of potassium nitrate in water
(c)
Hotchocolate
(d)
Concrete mixture
A state of matter whose properties are between those of liquids and
crystalline solids:
(vill)
(a)
Liquid crystal
(b)
Supercritical fluid
(c)
Plasma
(d)
Dark matter
When the tiny visible particles of a substance are dispersed through a
medium, the mixture is named as:
(a)
True solution
(b) Colloid
(c)
Suspension
(d) Saturated solution
(ix)
A solution of KCIO3 has a solubility of about 13.2g per 100 cm’ at 40 C.
How its solubility will be affected, if you decrease the temperature?
(a)
The solubility willincrease
(6)
The solubility
willdecrease
(c)
Thesolubility
will remain the same
(d)
The solubility will first increase with temperature and then it will
decrease
(x)
You are studying the rate of hydrolysis of starch under different
conditions of temperature.
In which branch of chemistry this topic will
fall?
(a) Organic Chemistry
(b) Analytical Chemistry
(c) Biochemistry
(d) Physical Chemistry
Questions for Short Answers
Why is there a need to divide Chemistry into many branches?
Give three
reasons.
Reactions may take place due to electrons present outside the nucleus or
they may take place inside the nucleus.
Which branches of Chemistry cover
these two types of reactions?
What types of problems are solved in analytical chemistry?
Both graphite and graphene have hexagonal layered structures.
What is the
difference?
Why are supercritical fluids important?
Vi.
In which state does matter exist in the Sun?
Vil.
What is the importance of graphene?
Vill.
Which form of matter do most ofthe material things in this world belong to?
Constructed Response Questions
How does a supercritical state look like?
In what way is plasma created in a fluorescent tube?
Most of the molecules we study in biochemistry are organic in nature.
Where
does the difference exist in organic and biochemistry branches of Chemistry?
Give the reason of brilliance shown by diamond.
Can you improve it?
Explain the dissolution of sodium chloride in water.
Vi.
Why do different compounds have different solubilities in water at a
particular temperature?
Vil.
Why NaCl can not be crystallized from water just like KNO3?
vill.
Why graphite is slippery to touch?
Which property of graphite enables it to
be used as lubricant?
Descriptive Questions
Mention the name ofthe branch of Chemistry in which you will study each of
the following topics.
(a) Rate of areaction
(b) Digestion of food in human body
(c) Properties of plasma
(d) Ecosystem
(e) Reactions taking place during fireworks
(f) Measurement ofthe absorption of wavelength with the help of ultraviolet
spectrometer
What are allotropic forms?
Explain the allotropic forms of carbon and
sulphur.
How does coal differ from diamond?
What are supercritical fluids.
How are they different from ordinary liquids?
Define solubility of a solute.
How does the solubility of solutes change with
the increase in temperature?
What types of movements are present in gaseous and liquid molecules?
Differentiate between the areas which are studied under inorganic and
organic chemistry.
Investigative Questions
Preparation of solutions leads to an important process in chemistry which
enables us to purify a compound through crystallization.
Describe a process
in which potassium nitrate is purified by crystallizing it in water.
Graphene is called a miracle material and it is the material of the future.
Which of its many properties makes it very useful in electronics?
——————
[Chapter 2]
Student Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter, students will be able to:
Explain the structure of the atom as a central nucleus containing neutrons and
protons surrounded by electrons in shells
State that, orbits (shells) are energy levels of electrons and a larger shell implies higher
energy and greater average distance from nucleus
State that electrons are quantum particles with probabilistic paths whose exact paths
and locations cannot be mapped (with reference to the uncertainty principle}
Explain that a nucleus is made up of protons and neutrons held together by strong
nuclear force
Explain that an atomic modelis an aid to understand the structure of
an atom.
State the relative charge and relative masses of a subatomic particles (an electron,
proton and neutron)
Interpret the relationship between a subatomic particle, their mass and charge.
Illustrate the path that positively and negatively charged particles would take under
the influence ofa Uniform Electric Field.
Define proton number
/ atomic number as the number of protons in the nucleus of an
atom.
Explain that the proton number is unique to each element and used to arrange
elements in periodic table
State that radioactivity can change the proton number and alter an atom's identity
Define nucleon number
/ atomic mass as sum of number of protons and neutrons in
the nucleus of an atom.
Define isotopes as different atoms of the same element that have same number of
protons but different neutrons
State that isotopes can affect molecular mass but not chemical properties of
an atom
Determine the number of protons and neutrons of different isotopes
Define relative atomic mass as the average mass of isotopes of an element compared
to 1/12th of mass of an atom of Carbon-12
State that isotopes can exhibit radioactivity
Discuss the importance of isotopes using carbon dating and medical imaging as
examples.
Describe the formation of positive (cation) and negative (anion) ions from
atoms.
Interpret
and use the symbols for atoms and ions
Calculate relative atomic mass of an element from relative masses and abundance of
isotopes,
Calculate the relative mass of an isotope given relative atomic mass and abundance
ofall stable isotopes.
Elements are very different from one another.
A large number of elements
exist as solids and very few are present as liquids while the rest exist as gases.
All
these elements are however made up of atoms.
Have you ever thought why these elements are so different from one
another?
Sulphur looks very different from gold which, in turn, is very different
from bromine (Fig: 2.1).
Similarly iron is a heavy metal while aluminium and zinc
are light metals.
Metals are mostly lustrous while non-metals like sulphur and
carbon appear dull.
The difference in the properties of elements is due to the
difference in the properties of their constituent atoms.
S
Different Elements look different
Write down the names of the elements shown in the above pictures.
[Topic 2.1 Structure of Atom]
The idea of atom was first proposed in Greece when the philosopher
Democritus declared that all matter is made of tiny particles.
He named this
particle as atom, a particle that cannot be further subdivided.
Around 1800, the
English chemist John Dalton did many experiments with compounds that
provided the evidence for the existance of atoms.
In the last decade of nineteenth
century, a group of scientists were trying to pass electricity through gases at
reduced pressure.
During the course of these experiments known as ‘Discharge
Tube Experiments’, they discovered that atoms are no longer the smallest particles
of matter; rather there exist particles that are even smaller than atoms.
In other
words, atoms are composed of negatively charged particles called electrons and
positively charged particles called protons.
It was also discovered that a proton is
1836 times heavier than an electron.
In a discharge tube, the presence of the
negatively charged particles was ascertained because of their deflection towards
the positive plate in an electric field.
Similarly, the presence of positively charged
particles was confirmed due to their deflection towards the negative plate.
Discovery of Electrons
A discharge tube is a hard glass
tube provided with two metallic
electrodes and a vacuum pump to
evacuate the gas present in it .
When a very high voltage is applied to
a gas at a very low pressure presentina
glass tube the glass surface behind the
positive electrode started to glow, due
Discharge Tube Experiment
to the rays emitted from the cathode.
Cathode Rays
These rays were named as cathode rays.
In 1897, British physicist Joseph John
Thomson studied the properties of cathode rays by passing them through the
oppositely charged electric plates.
It was observed that cathode rays bent
towards the positively charged plate showing that they carry negative charge.
Thomson also installed two magnets on either side of the discharge tube and
noticed that cathode rays were also diverted by the magnetic field.
Thomson
used the findings of his experiments to calculate the mass to charge ratio of
cathode rays which finally proved that cathode rays are in fact, negatively
charged material particles.
These particles were later named as electrons.
It was
also shown that electrons are the subatomic particles ofall elements.
Discovery of Proton
The presence of positively charged particles in an atom had been first
observed by E.Goldstein in 1886.
It was based on the concept that atoms are
electrically neutral
having
same
number of positive and negative
charges.
He performed a series of
experiments with a gas-discharge
tube having a perforated cathode.
A
ar Ng _— (
new type of rays were produced from
Mie
the anode which moved towards the
cathode.
He called these new rays as
canal rays or anode rays.
Cathode
Anode Rays
Anode
The properties of these rays seemed to vary depending on the gas used in
the discharge tube.
In fact what he discovered was gas ions and this also included
hydrogen ions (H’).
Goldstein at that time knew nothing about its significance.
In 1917, Rutherford performed experiments which proved that the
hydrogen nucleus is present in other nuclei.
Rutherford thought that a hydrogen
nucleus or a proton must be the fundamental building block ofall nuclei and also
possibly a new fundamental particle as well.
Discovery of Neutron
Later on, in 1933, another particle neutron was also discovered, which is
known to carry no charge.
The mass of a neutron is almost the same as that of a
proton.
These three particles i.e. electron, proton and neutron were given the
name fundamental particles and are shown to be present in all atoms (except
ordinary hydrogen which does not have a neutron) irrespective of the fact that
these atoms behave very different from one another.
It was, however, also shown
that the number ofthese particles is different in different atoms.
After the discovery of these particles, a very important question arose as
to how these particles are arranged in a tiny place called atom.
In other words,
what is the structure of an atom?
Discovery of Nucleus
Lord Rutherford, in 1911, provided answer to this question.
He carried out
a remarkable experiment in which he hit a stream of special type of particles to a
s
Although the nucleus is less than one hundred-Thousandth (1/100,000) of
the size of the atom, it contains more than 99.9% ofthe mass of the atom.
very thin gold foil.
From this experiment he concluded that an atom has two
portions.
A tiny central portion which he called as nucleus and a relatively large
area surrounding this, which he called extra nuclear portion.
It was also discovered that almost all the mass of an atom is concentrated
in the nucleus because both the heavy particles i.e. protons and neutrons are
found to be present here.
In the nucleus these two particles are held together by
a strong nuclear force.
Particle
Charge
Mass
Electron
—1.6022 x 10 C
9.109 x 10 " Kg
Proton
+1.6022 x 107 C
1.673 x 10 ’ Kg
Neutron
0.0
1.675 x 10 ’ Kg
Bohr's Atomic Model
In 1913, Niels Bohr proposed a model for the hydrogen atom which is
called Bohr's atomic model.
According to this model the electron can revolve
around the nucleus of the atom in specific paths called orbits or shells.
When the
electron is revolving in one of these orbits, its energy is fixed.
Also, when the
electron is present in the orbit which is closest to the nucleus, its energy is
minimum and it is called the ground state of the atom.
The orbits that are further
away from the nucleus possess successively greater energy.
The electron is not
allowed to occupy a space in between the orbits.
Since electron present in each shell has a fixed energy, these shells are
also named as energy levels.
The shell which is nearest to the nucleus is called
first shell or K shell and the electron present in it has a fixed value of energy.
Similarly, the second shell will also be at a definite distance from the nucleus
which will, of course, be greater than the first shell and electron present in it will
also possess greater value of energy.
Similarly, electron may also be present in
the third or higher shells.
Each shell is further sub-divided into sub-shells or orbitals.
The number of
sub-shells present in a shell is equal to the value of n for that shell.
For the first
shell, (n = 1), it will, therefore, have only one sub-shell which is called s sub-shell.
For (n = 2), there will be two sub-shells s and p.
The second shell will, therefore,
have two sets of sub-shells.
The third shell (n = 3) has three sub-shells s, p and d.
The fourth shell consists of four sub-shells s, p, d and f.
The size of an atom is so small that it is not possible to see it with naked eye.
However,
a transition electron microscope can be used to see atoms.
According to modern approach, electrons are like charged clouds whose
location around the nucleus cannot be predicted with one hundred percent
certainty.
All we can say
is that there is a certain
probability of finding Third shell (M)
the electron at a certain
b bl didistance f from
probable
the nucleus.
n=3
E=Es
First shell (K)
n=1
E=E
Nucleus,
Second shell (L)
Fourth shell (N)
n=2
E = E,
n=4
E= E,
E, > E3 > Eo > Ey
The largest atom cesium is approximately nine times bigger than the smallest
atom helium.
In order to find out the number of electrons which can be
accommodated in these extra nuclear shells, the scientists have devised a
formula called (2n*) formula where n can have values 1,2, 3 ...and so on and they
represent the number of shells.
Shells have also been named as K, L, M, N.... and
so on.
When the value of nis one, it means first or K shell and the maximum
number of electrons which can be present in this shell is (2 x 1 = 2).
K shell can,
however, have less than two electrons or it may not have any electron.
Similarly when (n = 2), it means second or L shell and the maximum
number of electrons it can accommodate is (2 x 2? = 8).
For (n = 3) or M shell, it
can accommodate 18 electrons at the most.
This process will go on until the
electrons present in an atom are finished.
The maximum number of electrons which can be accommodate in sub-
shells s, p, d and f are 2, 6 10 and 14 respectively.
In the first shell there are 2
electrons which shall go to (s) sub-shell.
In the second shell, 8 electrons will be
further sub-divided, s-subshell will have 2 electrons and 6 electrons will be
accommodated in p-subshell.
[Topic 2.2 Atomic Number and Mass Number]
Electrons, protons and neutrons are called the fundamental particles of all
types of matter.
In other words, the atoms of all the elements present in this
world contain same electrons, protons and neutrons.
However, an atom of one
element differs from an atom of another element because it contains different
number ofthe fundamental particles.
The number of protons present in the atoms of an element is always fixed
and it is called the atomic number of that element.
Since an atom, as a whole, is
electrically neutral, the number of electrons present in an atom will be the same
as the number of protons.
Atomic number of an element is represented by Z.
Atomic number of an element is unique to that element and the element is
identified by this number.
In a periodic table of elements, the elements are
arranged according to ascending order of their atomic numbers.
The total number of protons and neutrons present in an atom almost
accounts for the total mass of that atom and hence it is called its nucleon number
or mass number.
It is represented by A.
The mass of electron being very small is
not included in the mass number.
Just like atomic number, the atom of an element may also be identified
from its mass number.
For example, the number of protons present in an oxygen
atom is 8, so its atomic number is 8 while the total number of protons and
neutrons present in it is 16, so its mass number is 16.
Information about the
atomic number and the mass number is often included with the symbol of any
element.
The atomic number is written as a left subscript while the mass number
as a left superscript.
So, oxygen atom would be symbolized as ‘30.
Similarly,
carbon atom symbolized as ‘gC will have 6 protons and 6 neutrons.
The number of neutrons N present in an atom can be calculated if its
atomic number
Z and mass number (A) are known.
N=A—Z
Thus, the number of neutrons in sulphur atom, symbolized as 72S, can be
calculated as 32 — 16 = 16.
Changing the number of electrons of an element forms ions, while changing the
number of neutrons of an element forms isotopes.
Sample Example:
Calculate the number of neutrons, protons and electrons in barium sgba
Solution:] Each barium atom will have 56 protons and 56 electrons.
The
number of neutrons in barium will be calculated as follows:
N=A-Z
N = 137-56 = 81
So each '2/Ba atom will have 81 neutrons, 56 protons and 56
electrons.
Calculate the number of neutrons, protons and electrons in the
following atoms.
pt, 25 Sin, '
[Topic 2.3 Isotopes and their Masses]
All the atoms of an element must necessarily have the same atomic number, but
their mass number may vary depending upon the number of neutrons present in
the nucleus.
Atoms of the same element having different number of neutrons in
their nuclei are called isotopes.
For example, element carbon has three isotopes
as its atoms have six, seven and eight neutrons in their nuclei.
These isotopes are
represented as'<C, '2C, '2C.
Similarly, hydrogen exists as three isotopes, Hydrogen,
Deuterium and Tritium represented by }H, {Hand ;H.
Hydrogen ( /H) is the only
atom which does not have a neutron.
Since the chemical properties of the
elements are determined by the number of electrons, all three isotopes will show
almost the same chemical behaviour, although their physical properties may be
different.
‘H has twice the mass of }H while the mass of 3H is thrice as the mass of |H.
Similarly, the masses ofthree different isotopes of carbon are different.
Isotopes of Hydrogen Atom, jH, 7H, 7H
Isotopes of Carbon Atom, '<C, '2C, iC
Exercise: Why isotopes of an element show same chemical
properties while their physical properties are different?
Radioactive Isotopes
The isotopes of the same element do not have the same physical
properties.
Several isotopes of the same elements exist whose nuclei are
unstable.
They emit excess energy in the form of radiation.
This process of
emission of radiation is called radioactivity and the isotope which emits energy is
called radioactive isotope.
Tritium ;H is a radioactive isotope and the other two
isotopes of hydrogen are stable and do not emit any radiation.
When a radioactive element emits radiation, it is transformed into another
chemical element.
This process is called radioactive decay.
This new element may
be stable or may be radioactive so that it also emits radiation.
U
(Uranium)
> 234 Th
(Thorium)
energy
Thorium is unstable and further
disintegrates to give
Pa (Protactinium)
“9,Pa
3 Bi
about 98% of its atoms.
energy
(Protactinium)
(Thorium)
Every year, our body replaces
(Bismuth)
“g,Il
(Thallium)
energy
Applications of Radioactive Isotopes
Radioactive isotopes are useful in medical imaging.
Doctors use them to
diagnose the disease by injecting the patient with a small amount of radioactive
fluid.
Technetium — 99m is used for diagnostic imaging across human organs like
brain, lungs, etc.
Doctors use a special camera to watch how the radioactive fluid
moves.
1.
Why does a radioactive isotope emit radiation?
2.
Give an example of a radioactive isotope which disintegrates to give
a stable atom.
Gallium has many interesting properties.
Its melting point is below body
temperature so it is liquid at room temperature.
It does not evaporate.
Radiocarbon dating is a method for finding out the age of an historical
object containing organic material with the help of radioactive isotope of
carbon “C.
The method involves measuring the proportion of '“C in a sample
from a dead plant or animal like a piece of wood or a bone which provides
information that can be used to calculate when an animal or plant died.
The older
the sample is, the less *“C is to be detected.
Radioactive isotopes are used to test the strength of metals and concrete
mixture.
They are used to generate cheap nuclear power and to find oil fields.
In
medicine they are used to diagnose and treat many medical conditions and
diseases, including cancer and thyroid disorders.
lonization of Atoms by a Radioactive Source
Radiation emitted from a radioactive source causes atoms to ionize.
For
example, radiation emitted by a radioactive element radium -226 can remove
electron or electrons from the atom.
However, this ionizing radiation should
have enough energy to remove the tightly bound electron from the orbit of an
atom.
Electron can be lost because an ionizing radiation collides with the atom
and forces the electron away from the atom.
It an atom of sodium is hit by an
ionizing radiation, it may lose an electron.
This process converts the atom into a
positively charged ion (cation).
Na
Energy
Na
Cation
The same elements occur everywhere in the universe.
Matter on Mars or
in any other planet consists of the same elements found on Earth.
[Topic 2.4 Relative Atomic Mass]
Ever since the existence of atom was recognized, the chemists were trying
to find out a method which would allow them to compare the masses of different
atoms.
It was necessary because without knowing the relative masses of atoms,
we would not know in which ratio of masses we mix the reactants to carry outa
chemical reaction.
In 1961, the chemists adopted a new scale for the
measurement of the relative masses of atoms.
The unit mass on this scale is 1/12"
of the mass of lighter isotope of carbon taken as 12.
The mass of one atom of
carbon on this scale is exactly 12 and the masses of the other atoms are
measured relative to this unit.
The relative atomic mass of an element is thus
defined as the mass of an atom of that element relative to the mass of light
isotope of carbon taken as 12.
The relative atomic masses of elements are
expressed in atomic mass unit (amu).
It is defined as one-twelfth the mass of an
atom of carbon-12.
lamu = 1.67377 x 10 kg
For example, the mass of one atom of hydrogen-1 on atomic mass scale is 1.007
amu, similarly the mass of one atom ofsulphur-32 is 31.972 amu.
How would you compare the masses ofthe atoms of Mg and Cl?
Calculation of Relative Atomic Mass from Isotopic Abundance
An element usually consists of a few different isotopes with different mass
numbers.
These mass numbers are called relative isotopic masses.
Each isotope
will also have its own naturally occurring abundance which is called isotopic
abundance.
Relative atomic mass of an element can be calculated from the relative
isotopic masses (m) and isotopic abundances (p) by the following formula
Relative atomic mass =
MP;
MP,
M5P5...sceceeceecses
The element Krypton (Kr) has five isotopes.
Their relative isotopic masses
and isotopic abundances are shown in the following Table (2.2).
Table (2.2) Isotopic Abundances of Krypton
Relative Isotopic Mass
Isotopic Abundance
2.0%
12.0%
12.0%
57.0%
17.0%
Sample Example 1:
Relative atomic mass of krypton
= 80x 2.0+ 82 x12.0 + 83 x 12.0 + 84 x 57.0 + 85 x 57.0
= 83.7
Sample Example 2:
Calculate the relative atomic mass of light isotope of chlorine when its relative
atomic mass is taken as 35.45.
Relative isotopic abundance of Cl-37 = 24.23%
Relative isotopic abundance of light isotope of chlorine = 75.77%
Relative atomic mass ofchlorine = 35.45
Relative atomic mass ofchlorine
— CI x 75.77 + 37 x 24.23
35 45
_ Cl x 75.77 + 37 x 24.23
= Cl x 75.77 + 37 x 24.23
3545 -896.51
= Clx 75.77
2648.49 / 75.77
= Cl
34.95
= Cl
Relative atomic mass of light isotope ofchlorine is 34.95.
Calculate the relative atomic mass of Lead (Pb).
Isotopic abundances
of isotopes are 2.0, 24.0, 22.0, 52.0 respectively.
204Db
206Dbh
207Db
208Dbh
AnEnglish chemist, John Dalton provided the evidence for the existence of atoms.
Discharge tube experiments showed that atoms are no longer smallest particles of
matter.
Rather they are made up of still smaller particles called electron and proton.
Neutron was discovered separately.
Electrons, protons and neutrons are shown to be present in all the elements
irrespective of the fact that the elements behave very differently.
Different elements,
however, contain different number of these particles.
Lord Rutherford discovered that all atoms have a central part which he named as
nucleus.
The protons and neutrons are present in this nucleus while the electrons are
revolving around the nucleus.
Anatom being electrically neutral contains the same number of electrons and protons.
According to Bohr's atomic model, the electron revolves around the nucleus in
definite circular paths called orbits or shells.
As long as electron revolves in an orbit its
energy remains fixed.
An electron will have more energy if it is located away from the
nucleus.
The number of protons present in the nucleus of an element is called the atomic
number ofthat element.
The total number of protons and neutrons present in the nucleus of an element in
called its mass number.
lsotopes are the atoms of the same element which have the same number of protons
but different number of neutrons.
10.
Isotopes of an element have same chemical properties but they differ in their physical
properties.
11.
Isotopes of an element may be stable or radioactive.
Radioactive isotopes have many
useful applications in medicine.
12.
13.
Radioactive isotopes have unstable nuclei and they throw out radiation.
Relative atomic mass of an element can be calculated from the relative isotopic
masses of this element and their isotopic abundances.
(i)
+ ‘Tick(“) the correct answer.
How many electrons can be accommodated at the most in the third shell
of the elements?
(a)
(ii)
(b)
(c)
(d)
What information was obtained from discharge tube experiments?
(a)
Structure of atom was discovered.
(b)
Neutrons and protons were discovered.
(c)
Electrons and protons were discovered.
(d)
Presence of nucleus in an atom was discovered.
(iii)
Why have isotopes not been shown in the periodic table?
(a)
Periodic table cannot accommodate a large number of isotopes of
different elements.
(b)
Some of the isotopes are unstable and they give rise to different
elements
(c)
All the isotopes have same atomic number; so there is no need to
give them separate places.
(d)
(iv)
(v)
Isotopes do not show periodic behavior.
Which particle is present in different number in the isotopes?
(a)
Electron
(b)
Neutron
(c)
Proton
(d)
Bothneutron and electron
In which isotope of oxygen there are the equalenumber of protons,
electrons and neutrons?
(a) "O
(vi)
(c) O
(d) Nonof these
What will be the relative atomic mass of nitrogen given the abundances of
its two isotopes, “N and "N are 99.64 and 0.35 respectively.
(a)
(vii)
(b) " O
14.0210
(b)
14.0021
(c)
14.2100
(d) 14.1200
How is radiocarbon dating Useful for archeologists?
(a)
Ithelps determine the age of organic matter.
(b)
Ithelps determine the composition of matter.
(c)
Ithelps determine the usefulness of matter.
(d) Ithelps determine whether the matter is radioactive or not.
(viil)
What does keeptthe particles present in the nucleus intact?
(a)
Particles are held together by strong nuclear force.
(b)
Particles are held together by weak nuclear force.
(c)
Particles are held together by electrostatic force.
(d) Particles are held together by dipolar force.
(ix)
How do electrons keep themselves away from the oppositely charged
nucleus?
(a)
By keeping themselves stationary
(6)
By revolving around the nucleus
(c)
Due to their wave-like nature
(d)
(x)
Amagnetic field around the nucleus keeps them away
Rubidium consists of two isotopes “Rb and “Rb.
The percent abundance
of the light isotope is 72.2%
What is the percent abundance of the
heavier isotope?
Its atomic mass is 85.47
(a)
(b)
27.8%
(c)
(d) 72%
Questions for Short Answers
Why is it said that almost all the mass of an atom is concentrated
in its
nucleus?
Why are elements different from one another?
How many neutrons are presentin *33Bi?
Why is tritium (7H) a radioactive element?
How can an atom absorb and envolve energy?
Constructed Response Questions
Why does the energy of electron increase as we move from first shell to
second shell?
Why is it needed to lower the pressure of the gas inside the discharge tube?
What is the classical concept of an electron?
How has this concept changed
with time?
Why the nuclei ofthe radioactive elements are unstable?
During discharge tube experiments, how did the scientists conclude that the
same type of electrons and protons are present in all the elements?
Descriptive Questions
Explain the structure of a hydrogen atom.
How does the theory of atomic structure explain the ionization of atoms bya
radioactive isotope?
What is radioactivity?
Explain any three applications of radioactive isotopes.
Find out the relative atomic mass of mercury from the following data.
Isotope
Relative Abundance.
Isotope
Relative Abundance
Hg
"Hg
0.0146%
10.02%
Hg
“Hg
16.34%
23.13%
*'Hg
“Hg
13.22%
6.85%
“Hg
29.80%
Investigative Questions
How can scientists synthesize elements in the laboaratory?
A system just like our solar system exists in an atom.
Comment on this
statement.
Chapter
"aS,
Ghemnical!
Bondingiaaaaeeas
[Chapter 3]
Student Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter, students will be able to:
Describe that noble gas electronic configuration, octet and duplet rules help predict
chemical properties of main group elements
Compare between the formation of cations and anions
Account for the electropositive and electronegative nature of metals and non-metals.
Define ionic, covalent, coordinate covalent and metallic bonds
Differentiate between ionic compounds and covalent compounds. (The following
points need to be included in the respective definitions:
a. lonic Bond as strong electrostatic attraction between oppositely charged ions
b.
Covalent bond as strong electrostatic attraction between shared electrons and two
nuclei
c.
Metallic bond as strong electrostatic attraction between cloud/sea of delocalized
electrons and positively charged cations)
Explain the properties of compounds in terms of bonding and structure
Compare uses and properties of materials such as strength and conductivity as
determined by the type of chemical bond present between their atoms.
Interpret the strength of forces of attraction and their impact on melting and boiling
points of ionic and covalent compounds.
Justify the availability of free charged particles (electrons or ions) for conduction of
electricity in ionic compounds (solid and molten) covalent compounds and metallic
bonds.
Recognize that some substances can ionize when dissolved in water. (e.g. acids
dissolves in water and conduct electricity)
— Justify the suitability of usage of graphite, diamond and metals for industrial
purposes (Some examples may include: a. graphite as lubricant or an electrode
b.diamondincuttingtools
_c. metals for wires, and sheets)
Draw the structure of ionic and covalent compounds along with their format ion.
{some examples can include: a. ionic bonds in binary compounds such as NaBr, Naf,
CaCl, using dot-and- cross diagrams and Lewisdot structures simple molecules
including H,, Cl,, Oz, N,, H,0, CH, NH,, HCl, CH,O H, C,H, CO,, HCN, and similar
molecules using dot and-cross diagrams and Lewis- dot structures)
[Topic 3.1 Why do atoms form chemical bonds?]
Atoms have a tendency to decrease their energy.
They can do this by
combining with other atoms.
It is a natural phenomenon because it increases the
stability of atoms.
How do atoms succeed in lowering their energy?
The early chemists had
started thinking about this a long time ago.
They finally succeeded to get an
answer only when the noble gases He, Ne, Ar, Kr and Xe were discovered.
Helium
has two electrons in its outermost shell while all other noble gases have eight
electrons in their outermost shells.
We also know about these gases that neither
their atoms combine with themselves nor with other atoms.
The probable reason
for this lack of reactivity was their stability.
It was suggested that these gases
were stable due to the presence of two electrons in helium and eight electrons in
the outermost shells of the rest of the gases.
This gave rise to a principle that
having two electrons (for hydrogen and helium which have only the first shell) or
eight electrons in the outermost shell meant stability and hence unreactivity as
well.
This principle was named as Duplet or Octet Rule.
The discovery of duplet or octet rule was followed by another similar
suggestion that atoms form bonds because they would like to lower their energy
by completing their duplet or octet.
For example, for sodium atom it is easy to
lose one electron and stabilize itself than to gain seven electrons while
completing its octet.
Sodium atom, therefore, adopts the energetically easier
path and loses its electron to form a bond.
In the same way, it is energetically
favourable for hydrogen atom to lose one electron to become proton (H’) or
gain one electron to become hydride ion (H)).
In the latter case, it completes its
duplet.
Alkali and alkaline earth metals are therefore expected to be
electropositive metals which will form bonds with electronegative elements like
oxygen and chlorine.
Although, in the beginning, octet rule played a significant
role in understanding the nature of a chemical bond, yet further investigations
found it to be less important.
[Topic 3.2 Chemical Bond]
A chemical bond is a force of attraction between atoms which holds them
together in the form ofa molecule or a compound.
When atoms of different substances approach each other, there are two
possibilities.
They may attract or repel each other.
If the forces of attraction
between them dominate the forces of repulsion, the energy of the system gets
lowered and as a result the two atoms will react to form a new molecule.
Conversely, the two atoms simply move away from each other.
Important Information! \
The arrangement ofelectrons around the nucleus of an atom in shells and sub-shells is
called electronic configuration.
Types of Bonds
We shall consider here three types of bonds.
(1)
lonicbond
(2)
Covalent bond
(3)
Coordinate covalent bond
3.2.1
lonic Bond
This chemical bond is formed as a result of the tendency of atoms to lose
or gain electron or electrons to acquire the electronic configuration of the
nearest noble gas because this is a more stable electronic structure.
Let us take
the example of the formation of a simple and important compound, sodium
chloride.
This compound is formed when the elements sodium and chlorine react
chemically.
The electronic configurations of these elements are shown in .
1st shell
2nd shell
3rd shell
aiNa
47Cl
: Electronic Configurations of Sodium and Chlorine
An electron from the outermost shell of sodium atom is transferred to the
outermost shell of chlorine atom and in doing so, both these atoms acquire the
electronic configurations oftheir nearest noble gases. (Fig 3.2)
Na
Na +e
e + Cl
——~
C
Na + Cl ——~ >
Nac
Na’ cl
Sodium
Chlorine
Sodium
Chloride
atom
atom
ion
ion
: Transference of Electron from Sodium to Chlorine Atom
Similarly, sodium also reacts with fluorine and bromine to give sodium
fluoride and sodium bromide respectively.
It should be noted here that an electron or electrons, which take part ina
chemical reaction, come only from the outermost shells of the atoms.
Sodium
chloride, formed as a result of the chemical reaction mentioned on the previous
page contains the positively charged sodium ions (Na‘) and the negatively
charged chloride ions (CI).
These oppositely charged ions are then held together
by the electrostatic force of attraction.
The chemical bond, thus formed, is called
an lonic or an Electrovalent Bond and the compounds having such a bond are
called ionic compounds.
Calcium, an alkaline earth metal, loses two electrons to form calcium
chloride (CaClz).
Ca
———
2Cl
Ca”
2 —— > 2C/l
Co)
Cl
ors
Cl
Ca?"
: Formation of CaCl,
These ions then surround each other three dimensionally to form a crystal
lattice.
Examples of ionic compounds are KCl, Mg F, NaF, KBr, CaF,
What types of elements form ionic bonds?
What are the conditions for an ionic bond to be formed?
Figures ofcrystal lattices of NaCl and CaClp. (Fig 3.4)
cl
Crystal Lattice of NaCl
Crystal lattice of CaCl.
Crystal Lattices of NaCl and CaCl,
An ionic bond is therefore a bond which is formed by the complete
transference ofelectron or electrons from one atom to another atom.
3.2.2 Covalent Bond
During the formation of an ionic bond, the atoms lower their energy by
the transference of an electron (s) and thus acquire the electronic configurations
of the nearest noble gas.
However, it is not the only way by which atoms can
lower their energy.
Some atoms decrease their energy by mutually sharing their
electrons.
This can be explained as follows:
When two atoms approach each other in order to form a bond, they
undergo important changes in their energy.
The electrons belonging to one
atom will come under the attractive influence of the nucleus of the other atom.
This is the new force of attraction and will be responsible for lowering the energy.
The electrons and the nucleus of one atom will also repel the electrons and the
nucleus of the other atom.
This is the force of repulsion and will obviously
increase the energy.
The two atoms will bring themselves at such a distance so
that the attractive forces dominate the repulsive forces.
The total energy at this
distance will be minimum and thus a stable molecule is formed.
A covalent bond
is therefore a bond formed by the mutual sharing of an electron pair
provided by the bonded atoms.
This is called a single covalent bond.
In some compounds, the atoms share two electrons each to form a
double covalent bond.
In the same way atoms can share three electrons
each to form a triple covalent bond.
Double and triple covalent bonds have
two and three electron pairs respectively which are mutually shared
between the two atoms.
A single covalent bond is represented by a single
line(-),
a double covalent bond is represented by two lines (=) while a triple
covalent bond is represented by three lines(=).
The mutually shared electrons
may be shown by a dot or accross.
The formation of single, double and triple
covalent bonds in different molecules is explained in the examples shown in .
1.
What type of elements form covalent bond?
S E)
Howcovalent bond is different from an ionic bond?
iS
scdlzs ada*®
NES «
sci—ax
I
Oxx
Ose
x x
x x
x xX
Nx eN
: Formation of Single, Double and Triple Covalent Bonds
N
H—H
Gkcmore
Formation of Covalent Compounds
Water
A water molecule is formed when two hydrogen atoms share their
electrons separately with the electrons of one oxygen atom.
Carbon dioxide
503.
of H
A carbon dioxide molecule is formed when an atom of carbon shares its
four electrons with two oxygen atoms.
Each oxygen atom also shares two
MOLLE
x 0% C 3 xO) x
0 = C= 03
Ammonia
Hydrogen cyanide
Hx NxH
H—N—H
HxeCouN
H-C=EZN
Methane CH,
i
H
HxeCexXH
H
yee
Ethene
Cy Hy
i
H— C=C —H
yoy
Ea!
HxeCeeCexH
H
Methanol
H
H
H—C—O—H
be
HxeCexOxeH
H
"Exercise )
H
: Formation of Covalent Compounds
Draw electron dot and cross structure ofthe following compounds.
Si H,, PCI;, SO,, SO;
It is quite clear from the examples shown above that after mutually
Sharing their electrons, the bonded atoms acquire the electronic configurations
of the nearest noble gas.
Polar and Non-polar Covalent Bonds
When a covalent bond is formed between two identical atoms, the shared
pair of electrons lies at the middle of the two bonded atoms.
This gives rise to a
pure covalent bond which is essentially non-polar in character.
For example,
covalent bonds in hydrogen and chlorine molecules are non-polar in nature.
Contrary to this when a covalent bond is formed between two non-identical
atoms, the shared pair of electrons bend towards the atom which has more
electronegativity.
As a result a partial nagative charge is created on the more
electronegative atom and an equal partial positive charge is created on the less
electronegative atom.
A polar covalent bond is thus formed.
For example, in HCl
molecule, the shared pair of electron bends toward the more electronegative
chlorine atom creating a partial negative charge on it.
The covalent bond present
in HCI molecule is thus a polar covalent bond.
H xCl
Similarly the covalent bonds present in water are also polar covalent
bonds.
s
00s
Ha 8
3.2.3 Coordinate Covalent Bond
Coordinate covalent bond is a type of covalent bond in which the shared
electron pair is donated by one atom only.
This bond is formed when a species
has an electron pair to donate to another species.
The species which donates the
electron pair, is called a donor while that which accepts it is called an acceptor.
An
arrow head (—) pointing towards the acceptor represents this type of bond.
Following examples will help to explain this bond.
Hydroxonium Ion (H,O )
Acids provide protons (H*) when dissolved in water.
This proton has an
empty outer shell and can accept one of the two pairs of electrons present on the
oxygen atom in water molecule.
As a result of this, a hydroxonium ion (H,0 ) is
formed. (Fig 3.7)
H
- H
:O:
H
7)]4+
H —~
O —H
- H
: Formation of a Coordinate Covalent Bond Between H,O and H*
The positive charge covers whole of the hydroxonium ion.
After the
formation of hydroxonium ion, there does not remain any difference between a
coordinate covalent bond and a covalent bond.
All the three bonds of oxygen
behave exactly alike.
Reaction Between ammonia and boron trifluoride
A reaction between ammonia (NH3) and boron trifluoride (BF3) is another
example ofthe formation of a coordinate covalent bond.
During the reaction, an
electron pair from nitrogen of ammonia fills the partially empty outer shell of
boron present in boron trifluorinde .
AH +
H
——_
Other Examples
— | TM—_
H
H
H—N—H | Cr
H
H
H—C— C—O—H+H* ——>
H
—~>
H
H—N-—>B—F
H—cCcl
H
H—C— C—O—H
H
H
H
H
Ethyl Alcohol
: Formation of Boron trifluorinde ammonia, ammonium chloride
and protonated ethyl alcohol
In the above example, a coordinate covalent bond in ammonium chloride
links nitrogen of ammonia and the proton.
The positive charge is spread all over
ammonium ion.
All the four bonds between nitrogen and hydrogen in
ammonium ion behave exactly alike.
This proves the point that the difference
between a covalent bond and a coordinate covalent bond lies in the way they are
formed.
Once such bonds are formed, there does not remain any difference.
When a coordinate covalent bond breaks both the bonded electrons go to the
donor species.
Drawthe pictures of coordinate covalent bond formed between:
(a) BF, and AICI,
(b) CH,0 CH, and H*
Which compoundis not able to form a coordinate covalent bond?
[Topic 3.3 Metallic Bond]
The characteristics shown by metals are very different from those of ionic
and covalent compounds.
This suggests the presence of different types of
binding forces among the metallic atoms.
Properties of Metals
Metals usually show metallic lustre.
Metals usually have high melting and boiling points.
Metals are good conductors of heat and electricity.
Metals are usually hard and heavy.
Metals can be made into different shapes by applying pressure.
These characteristics of metals can be explained if we know the nature of binding
forces present between their atoms.
Usually metals have low values of ionization energy.
Their atoms can
therefore, lose their outer electron or electrons easily.
In other words, the nuclei
of metallic atoms cannot hold their outer electrons firmly.
For example, in
sodium metal, each sodium atom is surrounded by eight other sodium atoms.
The outer electrons of these atoms move freely between the vacant spaces
present between atoms because of the loose linkage they have with their nuclei.
No electron remains attached with any particular nucleus.
Instead, all the
electrons, at the same time, get attached with all the nuclei.
When all the atoms
attract all the electrons collectively, obviously they will be bound together.
A
metal will appear to have a sea of electrons in which all the nuclei of atoms are
submerged.
A metallic bond, is therefore a type of chemical bond which has
positively charged ions bound together by the mobile electrons.
POOOM
“OO
OOO GY
: Metallic Bond in Sodium Metal
The strength ofa metallic bond depends upon two factors: the number of
positive charges present on the positive ions and the number of mobile electrons
set free by each atom.
In sodium metal, for example, each sodium atom sets free
only one electron.
The metallic bond in sodium metal is, therefore, not very
strong.
In magnesium metal, each magnesium atom releases two electrons to
acquire two positive charges.
The metallic bond in magnesium metal will
evidently be stronger than that in sodium metal.
This explains why the
magnesium metal melts at a higher temperature than sodium metal.
O
O 9-0-0
O
SOMO:
O
ON
O
O
IES)
O
O eMe
O
O
: Metallic Bond in Magnesim Metal
The presence of freely moving electrons in metals makes them good
conductor of heat and electricity.
Moreover, in metals, the atoms are strongly
held and arranged in the form of rows one above the other.
This arrangement
makes them hard and heavy.
When pressure is applied on the metals, the upper
rows of atoms slip pass the lower rows.
As a result, their shapes are changed.
Metals can, therefore, be easily drawn into wires and sheets.
Pressure
Metal under Pressure
What type of atoms form metallic bond?
Give a comparison of metallic bond with an ionic bond.
I
Metals are extensively used in many industries.
They are used in machinery,
automobiles, railways, air crafts, rockets, in construction industry, in electronics
industry, in jewellery, in electric wires and many more.
[Topic 3.4 Electropositive Character of Metals]
Metals generally have a tendency to lose electrons to form positive ions
called cations.
This property is called the electropositive character of metals.
This
property is also related to the reactivity of the metals.
Metals which lose electron
or electrons easily are considered more reactive.
For example, alkali metals (Na,
K) are highly electropositive elements and thus they undergo reactions very
easily.
Sodium and potassium react vigorously with water and halogens to give
their respective hydroxides and halides.
They also react with acids to give salts
and hydrogen.
Alkaline earth metals (Mg, Ca), on the other hand, lose their outer
electrons less easily and thus they are less electropositive than alkali metals.
Their
reactions towards water and halogens are also less vigorous.
Aluminum is also highly electropositive metal.
It reacts readily with
mineral acids to form salts and hydrogen.
[Topic 3.5 Electronegative character of Non-metals]
Non-metals have an affinity towards electrons.
They tend to gain
electrons and become negatively charged ions called anions.
They are therefore,
named as electronegative elements.
Fluorine is the most electronegative
element in the periodic table followed by oxygen, nitrogen and chlorine.
Nonmetals readily react with metals forming ionic bonds.
Non-metals also combine
with other non-metals to form a wide variety of molecular substances.
[Topic 3.6 Compare the properties of ionic and covalent]
compounds.
lonic Compounds.
Covalent Compounds.
1.
In ionic compounds oppositely
1.
Covalent compounds mostly exist
charged
ions are
properly
as discrete neutral molecules.
arranged to give a
crystalline
There exists a strong electrostatic
structure.
the
attraction between the nuclei and
compound is neutral.
There exists
the shared electrons.
.
Covalent compounds are made of
a strong
As
a
whole
electrostatic force
between their ions.
. lonic compounds are usually
two or more non-metals.
molecular
mass
Lower
covalent
solids having high melting and
compounds are gases or low
boiling points.
The melting point
boiling liquids.
High molecular
of sodium chloride is 801 C
mass covalent compounds exist as
because it is difficult to break the
solids.
Generally, they have lower
strong electrostatic forces of
melting and boiling points.
.
They are usually insoluble in water
attraction between the oppositely
charged ions.
but soluble in non-polar solvents
. lonic compounds are generally
like ether, benzene and acetone.
soluble in polar solvents like water.
4.
They are usually good conductor
.
They are usually bad conductor of
electricity.
of electricity in molten state or in
solution form.
Their conductance
is due to the presence of free ions
in these forces.
[Topic 3.7 Intermolecular Forces of Attraction]
The forces of attraction which are present between the molecules of
elements and compounds are named as intermolecular forces of attraction.
These attractive forces are generally very weak as compared to the bonding
forces present between the atoms of substances.
Among the three states of
matter, these forces are the weakest among the molecules of the gases and the
strongest among the molecules of solids.
The intermolecular forces of attraction are of many type: some are weak
and other are relatively strong.
They affect the physical properties of the
substances.
The melting and boiling points of substances depend on the
strength ofthese forces.
The stronger the forces among the molecules of a liquid
the higher is its boiling point and vice versa.
Similarly stronger
the intermolecular
forces the higher will be the melting point of a solid.
We shall explain here two type of such forces.
1.
Dipole — Dipole Forces of Attraction
These attractive forces are present between the molecules of a polar
compound like HCI.
Hydrogen and chlorine attract the shared pair of electrons
between them with different force.
This force of attraction of an atom is called its
electronegativity.
Since the electronegativity of chlorine is greater than that of
hydrogen it attracts the shared pair of electrons with greater force.
As a result the
bond between hydrogen and chlorine becomes polar as shown in the following:
HTM x Cl
Due to these partial charges the molecules of HCI start attracting each
other.
These forces of attraction are called dipole-dipole forces. (Fig 3.12)
: Dipole-Dipole Attraction
The compounds which have this type of attractive forces will show
relatively higher melting and boiling points.
2.
Hydrogen Bonding
Hydrogen bonding is a special case of
dipole-dipole attractive forces.
When
hydrogen is covalent bonded to highly
electronegative elements like F, O or N then
Hydrogen
bond
the large difference of electronegativity
values will make the covalent bond highly
polar.
As a result strong dipole-dipole
attractions are observed among the
molecules.
For example, in H20, The O—H
bonds are highly polar.
Due to this, strong
attractive forces are developed between
water molecules as shown in the .
: Hydrogen bond
This attractive force present between the molecules of water is called
Hydrogen Bonding.
The strength of the hydrogen bonds causes water to have relatively
higher melting and boiling points as compared to compounds like H2S and NHs.
[Topic 3.8 Nature of Bonding and Properties]
In ionic compounds, the oppositely charged ions are held together by the
strong electrostatic force of attraction in the form of a crystal lattice.
Since the
ions are rigid in ionic compounds, such compounds therefore exist in the form of
very stable solids with significantly high melting points.
Since ions are spherical
and oppositely charged they can surround each other from all the sides, ionic
bonds are non-directional.
This arrangement of ions is called crystal lattice.
If an external force is applied on the crystal lattice, it breaks easily.
It shows
that ionic solids are highly brittle.
In the solid form, ionic compounds do not
conduct electricity because ions are tightly held and cannot move.
However, in
the molten state, the ions get free and start conducting electricity. lonic solids are
also generally soluble in water.
Water not only breaks the electrostatic force of
attraction but also hydrates the resulting free ions .
In the process of
hydration water molecules surround and interact with ions or molecules.
He
HO: —_—_——)>
Soerre
; Na’
, “
— H*
H y
Res
“ey,
Cl
He OF
gO-
oH HOt
oats
Na* =
tee, ‘e) =H +
we,
5+ H 7-O| o
| 5+
Pr Ny 4
He
5s.
Hs.
wenenens H
Hydrated Na’
é: Hydration oflons — tydrated Cr
— O
\He
lonic compounds in an aqueous solution also conduct electricity because
the free ions can now move towards their respective electrodes. lonic
compounds generally react in an aqueous solution.
When we mix two solutions
of ionic compounds, the positive ions of one compound may react with the
negative ions ofthe other to form a new compound.
NaCl, + AgNO, , 10, Na‘ + Cl
” AQ eq ~ NO seq
(aq)
AgCl.,, + Na eq + NOx
White precipitate of silver chloride comes out of the aqueous solution.
~ ) Interesting Information! \
Conduction of ionic compounds in molten state and in form of an aqueous solution
has been utilized to prepare many important elements and compounds.
For example,
electrolysis of molten sodium chloride gives us sodium metal and chlorine gas.
Similarly electrolysis of aqueous sodium chloride gives sodium hydroxide and
chlorine gas.
Diamonds, due to their exceptional hardness, are highly valued in industries.
Diamond
tipped glass cutters are used to make clean cuts in glass.
Diamond-tipped drill bits are
used to drill through hard rocks in mining operation.
Graphite is used in pencils, in polishes and to make crucibles.
Graphite electrodes are
used in battery cells and in electric arc furnaces to produce steel.
#0026
H
He
Be
Cl
yg6 eta
Chlorine
i
LI225F 12 3805
esas
13 26-981
Na
K
Mg
40.08
Ca
S159
Mn)
Fe
Cu .
Zn
nfo
N
14 2808S 15
2] 4495591
As
era
a
& 18
cl
207 17
s
30.97
9 18.9984
fe)
= wei 38 8762 398890584 40 = 419290637 42 3595 436.9063 44 1011 451029055 46 10642 47 107868 4g 11241 49 114838 5Q T2A9E 5) 121760 52 1278 532269085 54 13129
55 122.80 56 13733
87 a24 0b
88 226.02
And) se Aleem Linth Me
Franehurn
Radium
Ag
In
: 72 = 73 inne 74 abl rh a 76 wa 7 ae 78 wea 79 196.96 80 a 81 24383 g2
104 #71
105 2681
106 2681
1072701.
108 2691
Yanveon Meta Trewtion Het Terection Metal voneon mal
BR iemivy
rte!
89 227.02
ar37.04
Rutherfordiuene
Dutneur
Sg_
Seaborgnain
Au
Hg
109 2771
110 2821.
111 2824
112 261
113 286:
114 208
Perrot
Darmstadtiom
Rgul Cn
Yarebonon Mata orn Mel Vamaior Metet_
‘Copemicium
I
207 g3 20858 84 208.98 BS20898
Hs Mt
At
Nh FI Mc, “Wv Ts
86 222.01
116 298.2
Nooteie Co
Dpenes san:
57 1389088 58 S40118 59190 60 ua BAasus 6 sins ea ast “a ‘3162500 67 ee 68 a eSake =ro 71 1743060
Pr 1 wa
Ho a
LnLaz & —
al ‘Gd
c
ey von
9) 2210)
Th Pag
92 238.0289
95 241.0
Pu Am
S07
Bk “cf
me
252.0830
“M2520.
102 2
No
103 266.1
Elements and compounds in which atoms are covalent bonded, behave
very differently from ionic compounds.
Elements present at the right side of the
periodic table exist as covalently bonded diatomic molecules except inert gases,
for example, nitrogen(N,), oxygen(O,), fluorine(F,) and chlorine(Cl,).
Due to very
weak forces of attraction between their molecules, their densities and boiling
points are very low.
Bromine (Br2) exists as volatile fuming liquid while elements
like carbon, phosphorous and sulphur exist as covalent solids.
All these solid
elements exist both in amorphous and crystalline forms.
Coal is the amorphous form of carbon whereas diamond and graphite are
its crystalline forms.
Coal is used as a fuel in electricity generating plants.
In
diamond, each carbon atom is surrounded by four other carbon atoms linked
together by strong covalent bonds.
Due to this rigid structure, diamond is the
hardest thing on this planet.
It is used as a cutting, polishing and drilling tool.
Graphite consists of a layered structure, made of hexagonal rings of
carbon.
Since layers are not bonded strongly, they can slip past each other.
Graphite is thus used as a lubricant in industry.
Further, these layers in graphite
have mobile electrons in between them.
Graphite is a good conductor of
electricity and it is also used as an electrode.
Binary covalent compounds generally exist as low temperature boiling
gases except water.
Methane (CH,), ammonia (NH,), hydrogen sulphide (H,S),
hydrogen chloride (HCI), nitrogen dioxide (NO,), carbon dioxide (CO,) and
sulphur dioxide are all covalent compounds which are gases at room
temperature.
Water and hydrogen fluoride, on the other hand, are liquids at room
temperature.
Liquid water has a high boiling
point because strong
intermolecular forces are present between its molecules.
Covalent molecules like
hydrogen chloride, sulphuric acid and nitric acid ionize completely in water
behaving as very strong acids.
HCl.)
H,SO,,
HOLY
H,O
(aq)
4 cr
ZH (aq)
oy +
(aq)
SOx
Key Points
Atoms form bonds with other atoms to stabilize themselves by obeying duplet and
octet rules.
The force of attraction which keeps the atoms together is called a chemical bond.
Bond which is formed by the transference of one or more electrons is called ionic
bond.
A covalent bond is formed by the mutual sharing of electrons between atoms.
A
covalent bond may be single, double or triple.
When acovalent bond is formed between two identical atoms it is called a non-polar
covalent bond.
When a covalent bond is formed between two non-identical atoms, which have
different electronegative values, it is called a polar covalent bond.
Intermolecular forces are of two types; dipole-dipole attraction and hydrogen
bonding.
When an electron pair is provided by an atom or ion or molecule to form a bond it is
called a coordinate covalent bond.
— lonic solids are crystalline compounds with high melting and boiling points.
They are
generally soluble in aqueous solution.
10.
Lower molecular mass covalent compounds are gases or low boiling liquids.
Higher
molecular mass covalent compounds exist as solids.
They are bad conductors of
electricity and are soluble in organic solvents.
11.
Properties of ionic and covalent compounds are adequately explained on the basis of
the type of attractive forces present between them.
Exercise
Baw)
Tick(”) the correct answer.
i.
When molten copper and molten zinc are mixed together, they give rise
to a new substance called brass.
Predict what type of bond is formed
between copper and zinc.
(ii)
(a)
Coordinate covalent bond
(b)
lonicbond
(c)
Metallic bond
(d)
Covalent bond
| Which element is capable of forming all the three types of bonds;
covalent, coordinate covalent and ionic?
(a)
Carbon
(b) Oxygen
(c)
Magnesium
(d) Silicon
(iil)
Why is H20 a liquid while H2S is a gas?
(a)
Because in water, the atomic size of oxygen is smaller than that of
sulphur
(b)
Because water is a polar compound and there exists strong forces of
attraction between its molecules
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(c)
Because H20 molecule is lighter than H2S
(d)
Because water can easily freeze into ice
Which of the following bonds is expected to be the weakest?
(a)
C-C
(b) CI-Cl
(c)
O-O
(d) F—F
Which form of carbon is used as a lubricant?
(a)
Coal
(b)
Diamond
(c)
Graphite
(d)
Charcoal
Keeping in view the intermoleculareforces of attraction, indicate which
compound has the highest boiling point.
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)
(a)
H20
(b)
H2S
(c)
(d)
NH;
Which metal has the lowest melting point?
(a) Li
(b)
Na
(c) K
(d)
Which ionic compound has the highest melting point?
(a) NaCl
(b)
KCI
(c) LiCl
(d)
RbCl
Which compound contains both covalent and ionic bonds?
(a) MgCl,
(6)
NH,Cl
(c) CaO
(d)
PCI,
Which among the following has a double covalent bond?
(a) Ethane
(b)
Methane
(c) Ethylene
(d)
Acetylene
Questions for Short Answers
What type of elements lose their outer electron easily and what type of
elements gain electron easily?
Why do lower molecular mass covalent compounds exist as gases or low
boiling liquids.
Give one example of an element which exists as a crystalline solid and it has
covalent bonds between its atoms.
Which property of metals makes them malleable and ductile?
Is cordinate covalent bond a strong bond?
Write down dot and cross formula of HNOs.
Constructed Response Questions
Why HF is a liquid while HCl is a gas?
Why covalent compounds are generally not soluble in water?
How do metals conduct heat?
How many oxides does nitrogen form.
Write down the formulae of oxides?
What will happen if NaBr is treated with AgNOs in water?
Why does iodine exist as a solid while Cl2 exist as a gas?
Descriptive Questions
Explain the formation of an ionic bond and a covalent bond.
How do ions arange themselve to form NaCl crystal.
Explain the properties of metals keeping in view the nature of metellic bond.
Compare the properties of ionic and covalent compounds.
How will you explain the electrical conductivity of graphite crystals?
Why are metals usually hard and heavy?
Investigative Questions
The formula of AICI; in vapour phase is AlzCle which means it exists as a
dimer.
Explain the bonding between its two molecules?
Explain the structure of sand (SiOz).

[Chapter 4]
After studying this chapter, students will be able to:
State the formulae of common elements and compounds.
Define molecular formula of a compound as the number and type of different atoms
in one molecule
Define empirical formula of a compound as the simplest whole number ratio of
different atoms ina Molecule.
Deduce the formula and name of a binary ionic compounds from ions given relevant
information
Deduce the formula of amolecular substance from the given structure of molecules.
Use the relationship amount of substance= mass/ molar mass to calculate number of
moles, mass, molar mass, relative mass (atomic/molecular/formula) and number of
particles
Define mole as amount of substance containing Avogadro's number 6.02 107%) of
particles
Explain the relationship between a mole and Avogadro's constant.
Construct chemical equations and ionic equations to show reactants forming
products, including state symbols.
Deduce the symbol equation with state symbols for a chemical reaction given
relevant information.
Stoichiometry is an important concept in chemistry which helps us to
calculate the amounts of reactants and products by using a balanced chemical
equation.
It is based on the law of conservation of mass which states that matter
can neither be created nor destroyed.
Therefore, the total mass of all the
reactants must be equal to the total mass of all the products.
The stoichiometric
coefficient used to balance a chemical equation provides the mole ratio between
reactants and products.
Stoichiometry is used in industry quite often to determine the amount of
raw materials required to produce the desired amount ofthe products.
[Topic 4.1 Chemical formula]
Elements exist in different forms in this world.
There are elements which
exist in the form of aggregate of atoms.
These elements are represented by their
symbols alone, for example, Na, Ca, C, Fe, etc.
On the other hand, elements like
Oz, Nz, H2 exist as discrete molecules in which their atoms are chemically bonded
to each other.
In ozone, three atoms of oxygen are bonded to each other, so its
chemical formula is Os.
Similar to elements, chemical compounds also exist in different forms.
Common salt i.e. sodium chloride exists in the form of ions which are bonded
together in the form of a crystal.
Since ratio between its ions is 1:1, sodium
chloride is represented by a formula unit NaCl.
Similarly, the other ionic
compounds are represented by their formula units which show the minimum
ratio present between their ions.
Examples are CaCl2, Kor and BaCla, etc.
Covalent compounds generally exist in discrete molecules in which atoms
are bonded together.
For example, water exists as molecules which are
represented by the chemical formula H20.
It shows thatin one molecule of water
two atoms of hydrogen are bonded to one atom of oxygen.
Similarly, chemical
compound, ammonia is represented by NH; and methane gas is represented by
CH,.
A chemical compound is thus, represented by a chemical formula which is
called the molecular formula of that compound and which shows all the types of
atoms bonded together in one molecule of that compound.
Examples of
covalent compounds are HCl, HF, HaS, PH3, H2O2, H2SO4, CO2, CO, CeHe, etc.
How would you differentiate between the chemical formula of an element
and that of a compound?
Give examples.
Write down the names of ionic and
covalent compounds whose formulas have been given in this article.
[Topic 4.2 Empirical Formula]
Empirical Formula ofacompound shows the simplest whole number ratio
of atoms present in that compound.
All the ionic compounds are represented by
their empirical formulas.
These formulas show the simplest ratio present
between their ions.
The empirical formula of calcium fluoride is CaF. which shows
the ratio present between calcium and fluoride ions in its crystal.
For covalent chemical compounds, which exist as molecules, the empirical
formulas may be different from their molecular formulas.
For example, hydrogen
peroxide is represented by its molecular formula H203; its empirical formula will
be HO.
Similarly, a benzene molecule has CgHe as its molecular formula; so its
empirical formula will be CH.
For water, the molecular formula and the empirical
formula are both the same i.e.
H2O because there does not exist any minimum
ratio between hydrogen and oxygen atoms.
Since an empirical formula does not tell us
the actual number of atoms present in that
| Exercise )
compound, rather it represents the simplest ratio
between atoms,
it is
possible that some
compounds may have the same empirical formula.
For example, both benzene (CgHe) and acetylene
(C2H2) have the same empirical formula CH.
Give two examples of
the compounds which
have same empirical
and molecular formulas.
[Topic 4.3 Chemical Formulas of Binary lonic Compounds]
In order to write down the formula of an ionic compound, first identify the
cations and anions and the number of charges present on them.
Finally combine
the two ions together to form an electrically neutral compound.
If you know the name of binary ionic compound, you can write its
chemical formula.
Start by writing symbol of cation with its charge.
Then write the
symbol of anion with its charge and find out how many of these ions are needed
to give an electrically neutral compound.
For example, write down the formula of
lithium oxide.
The symbol of lithium cation with its single positive charge is Li’ .
The symbol ofanion is O*.
Let us nowapply crisscross method towritethe
formula.
In this method, the numerical value of each of
“ton
Anion
LiyO
Li2O
Lit?
oF
the ion charges is crossed over to become the
subscript of the other ion.
Signs of the charges are
then dropped.
Write down the formula of Aluminium oxide.
Cation
A
Anion “OP
Al2O3
Write down the formula of Magnesium nitride.
Cation
Mg.
_ Anion “NY
Mg3N2
Table (4.1) shows some important atoms, their ions and the charges on the ions
The composition of all the chemical products we use in our lives, such as shampoos,
perfumes, soaps and fertilizers are formed using stoichiometric calculations.
Without
stoichiometry the chemical industry does not exist.
Table (4.1) Atoms and their Cations and Anions
Atoms and their Cations
Atoms and their Anions and
with charges
Cations with charges
Atom
Charge
Atom
Charge
H
O
Na
Na”
N
Li'*
Cl
cl"
K
K"*
BrTM
Mg
MgTM*
Ca
Ca’*
Cu
CuTM, Cu**
Ba**
Fe
Fe**, Fe**
Zn
Zn**
Sn*TM*, Sn*
Al**
Ni**
[Topic 4.4 Chemical Formulas of Compounds]
Molecular formula of a compound can be found out if we know its
empirical formula.
To calculate the empirical formula of a compound, you need
to determine the simplest whole-number ratio of atoms in the compound.
This
can be done by using experimental data on the mass percent composition of the
compound.
Molecular formula
is then calculated by the following relationship.
Molecular formula = n (Empirical Formula)
Wheren
Molar Mass
Empirical Formula mass
For example, the empirical formula of hydrogen peroxide is HO.
Its molar
mass is 34.
Its molecular formula will then be
n= 47 =2
Molecular formula
(HO)2 = H2O2
If for a compound the value of n is one, then its molecular formula is the same as
its empirical formula.
Write down the names ofthree such compounds which have
different empirical and molecular formulas.
_ Sample Problem: \
Empirical formula of a compound is CH.
Its molecular mass is 78 g mol".
Find
out its molecular formula.
Solution: }
Empirical Formula
Molecular formula
n(Empirical formula)
Molecular mass = 78 g mol-1
molar mass
/ empirical formula mass
n
Molecular Formula
= 6
=(CH)g = CeHe
1.
The empirical formula of acompound is CH20.
Its molar mass is 180g
mol".
Determine its molecular formula.
2.
The empirical formula of a compound is CHO.
Its molar mass is 60g
mol".
Determine its molecular formula.
[Topic 4.5 Deduce the molecular formula from the structural formula]
In order to deduce the molecular formula from the structural formula the
Write down the structural formula of the compound.
wR Wh
following steps are taken.
Count the number of atoms of each type in the structural formula.
Write the symbols of all the elements.
Write the total number of atoms of each kind as a subscript.
Remove the subscript 1.
_ Sample Problem: \
Write down the molecular formula of sulphuric acid.
Its structural formula is:
O
H—O—S—O-—-H
Ithas2H,1Sand4Oatoms.
Its molecular formula will be H2SO,
1.
Find out the molecular formula of phosphoric acid, Its structural
formula is:
HO—P—OH
O
2.
Determine the molecular formula of n— propyl alcohol.
Its structural
formula is CH; —CH2—
CH, -OH
3.
Write down the formula of calcium carbonate.
Its structural formula
is:
O
YN 7
C
Ca’*
[Topic 4.6 Avogadro's Number (N,)]
In a chemical reaction, large number of atoms or molecules of reactants
react to give the products.
We would very much like to know the mass ratio in
which the reactants react.
For this purpose, we would also like to express these
masses of reactants in grams.
To achieve this objective, we need to transform the
concepts of chemical formula and atomic mass units into such concepts which
may lead us to know the masses of reacting elements and compounds in grams.
Avogadro, an Italian scientist, helped us to achieve this objective in the following
way.
Let us consider the following reaction in which two atoms of carbon react
with a molecule of oxygen to produce two molecules of CO.
Atom
Molecule
2CO
Molecules
Since it is not possible to account for the masses of individual atoms or
molecules because these are very small particles, we increase the number of
reacting species as written below.
eT (1)
2 x 100 atoms
100 Molecules
2 x 100 Molecules
2 x 10000 atoms
10000 Molecules
2 x 10000 Molecules
Increasing the number of reacting atoms or molecules will not change the
ratio in which these are reacting or are being formed.
Increasing the number of reacting species, however, has not solved the
problem because this number is still very small.
We should increase this number
to sucha value whereby it is convenient for us to calculate their masses.
Thus
2x6.022 x 10 Atoms
6.022x 10” Molecules
rea (2)
2x6.022x
10” Molecules
6.022 x 10” is a huge number and we have selected this because
1.00g = 6.022 x 10” amu
Now the amounts of reactants and products in the forementioned equations can
be written as follows.
2 x 6.022 x 10” x (12.0 amu)
24.00 g carbon atoms
6.022 x 10 x (32.0 amu)
32.00 g oxygen molecules
2 x 6.022 x 10” x (28.0 amu) = 2 x 28.00 g carbon monoxide molecules
The mass ratio between the reactants and those of products will then become
C
24g
32g
2CO oo rrecceceee (3)
56g
You must have realized that starting from a simple equation we have developed
such ratio of masses of the reacting species which can conveniently be used in
the laboratory.
According to the above-mentioned equation, 24 g of carbon contains 2 x
6.022 x 10 atoms of carbon, 32 g of oxygen contains 6.02 x 10 molecules of
oxygen and 56g of carbon monoxide contains 2 x 6.022 x 10” of its molecules.
The number 6.022 x 10” is called Avogadro's number after the name of an
Italian chemist Amaedo Avogadro.
Avogadro's number is the number of units in
one mole ofa substance.
This number is represented as N,.
[Topic 4.7 The Mole and Molar Mass]
Avogadro's number has an immense significance in Chemistry and the
quantity of a substance containing Avogadro's number of particles (NA) is called
a Mole.
Mole is a number like a dozen or a gross.
A dozen of oranges means 12
oranges.
Similarly, a mole of a substance means its 6.022 x 10” particles which
can be atoms, molecules or ions.
When we use the term mole of a substance, we
must also refer to what type of particles are present in this substance.
The
following examples will help you to understand the concept clearly.
A mole of carbon atoms contains 6.022 x 10” atoms and weighs 12 g.
A mole of oxygen molecules (O,) contains 6.022 x 10 molecules and
weighs 32g.
A mole of sodium chloride (NaCl) consists of 6.022 x 10” of its
formula units and its mass is 58.5 g.
The mass of one mole ofa substance is called Molar mass.
The molar mass
of hydrogen atoms refers to the mass of one mole of hydrogen atoms and its
value is 1.008 g.
Similarly the molar mass of hydrogen molecules will be 2.016 g.
The chemical equation discussed in the previous article will now be
understood in the following way.
2CO
Two atoms
One molecule
Two molecules
Two moles of C
One mole of O,
Two moles of CO
2x6.022x10” atoms
6.022*10TM molecules
2x6.022x10” molecules
Two moles
One mole
Two moles
24g
56g
i
*(- ) Interesting Information! \
Mole is important because atoms and molecules are so small that they can not be
counted.
The mole concept allows us to count atoms and molecules by weighing
macroscopically small amounts of matter.
Calculate the molar masses of the following compounds
_ Sample Problems: \
H;PO,, SiO,, C,,H,,0,,, N,O,, MgCO,
Determine the molar masses ofthe following compounds ing mol".
(a) H,SO, (Sulphuric acid)
(b) C,H,,0, (Glucose)
(a) H,SO,
Atomic mass of H = 1
Atomic mass of S = 32
Atomic mass of
O = 16
Add the contribution of each atom
2(1) + 1 (32) + 4(16) = 98g mol"
(b) C,H,.0;
Atomic mass ofC = 12
Atomic mass of H = 1
Add the contribution of each atom
6(12) + 12(1) + 6(16) = 180 g mol"
Atomic mass of
O = 16
[Topic 4.8 Chemical Equations and Chemical Reactions]
To understand a chemical change and to study the different factors which
control it, has always been a focal point in the efforts of chemists.
To achieve
these objectives, we should have an appropriate way of representing a chemical
change.
Fortunately, the chemists have developed a very suitable way of
representing a chemical change in terms of symbols of elements and formulas of
compounds.
Representing a chemical change in this way is called a chemical
equation.
A chemical equation tells us the elements or compounds which are
reacting and those which are being produced as a result of a chemical change.
The reacting substances are called as reactants while those being produced are
called products.
It is customary to write the reactants on the left-hand side and
the products on the right-hand side.
An arrow head drawn from reactants to
products separates the two.
The following example will help you to understand
these points clearly.
AAI
30,6)
Reactants
2AI,0,.
Products
The following points must be kept in mind while writing a chemical equation.
A chemical equation must obey the law of conservation of mass.
This
means that no atom should be destroyed or produced during a chemical
change.
The total number and the type of atoms must remain the same
during a chemical change.
Thus the total number and kind of atoms on
both sides of the equation must be equal or the chemical equation must
be balanced.
Theformulas of elements and compounds must be written correctly.
A chemical equation must determine the correct mole ratio among the
reactants, the products and between the reactants and the products.
A chemical equation must also point out the direction in which the
change is proceeding.
It is a usual practice to show the normal physical states of reactants and
products as a subscript.
Solid, liquid and gas are symbolized as s, | and g
respectively.
Aqueous (aq) represents the solvated ion.
A chemical equation can, however, only be written if all the previous
mentioned points are experimentally verified.
For example, the nature of the
products and their correct formulas must first be ascertained before writing a
chemical equation.
After the experimental verification of all the information
about a chemical change, we should now be able to write a correct chemical
equation.
The following equation has been written keeping in view all the points
mentioned above.
According to this chemical equation, zinc reacts with sulphuric acid to
give zinc sulphate and hydrogen gas.
This chemical equation further tells us the
mole ratio not only between reactants or products but also between reactants
and products.
According to the equation, one mole of zinc reacts with one mole
of sulphuric acid to produce one mole of zinc sulphate and one mole of
hydrogen gas.
Sometimes a chemical reaction moves both ways.
In other words, the
reactants react to give the products and the products, in turn, react to give the
reactants back.
Such reactions are called as reversible reactions and are
indicated by (——)
sign, é.g.:
Reaction involving ions may also be shown in the form of chemical equation.
Both AgNOs3 and NaCl are ionic compounds and are soluble in water.
When they
are mixed in water, they react to form products.
AgCl being insoluble comes out of the aqueous solution in the form of a
precipitate.
[Topic 4.9 Calculations Based on Chemical Equation]
A complete and balanced chemical equation tells us the mole ratio or
molar mass ratio between the reactants and the products.
With the help of this
ratio, we can find out the molar masses of the products provided we know the
molar masses of the reactants.
Similarly the molar masses of the reactants can
also be found out if we know the molar masses of the products.
For example, the following equation tells us that one mole (100 g) of
calcium carbonate reacts with two moles (73 g) of hydrochloric acid to produce
one mole (111 g) of CaCl,, one mole (18 g) of water and one mole (44 g) of carbon
dioxide.
The total masses ofthe reactants are equal to the total masses of the products.
25g of limestone (CaCOs) reacts with an excess of hydrochloric acid according
to the above equation.
How much calcium chloride (CaClz) will be produced?
Solution ) Mass of CaCO3 = 25g
Molar mass of CaCO3 = 100g mol"
Mass of CaCl. product = ?
Molar mass of CaClz = 111 g mol"
According to the equation
100 g of limestone reacts to produce calciumchloride
=111g
1 g of limestone will react to producecalciumchloride
= 700 g
25 g of limestone will react to produce calcium chloride = _ x 25
= 27./5g
1.80 moles of ethyl alcohol, when burnt in air completely, will utilize how
many moles of oxygen gas?
Also calculate the number of moles of CO2
produced.
Solution } No. of moles of ethyl alcohol
No. of moles ofoxygenneeded
= 1.80
The balanced chemical equation for the reaction will be
C,H;OH
30,,.
———~*
2C0,,,
3H,O,
According to this equation
One mole of ethyl alcohol, when completely burnt, needs oxygen
=3 moles
1.8 moles of ethyl alcohol, upon burning, will need oxygen
= x 1.8
= 5.4 moles
1 mole of ethyl alcohol produces moles of CO2
= 2.0
1.8 mol of ethyl alcohol will produce
= “ x 1.8
= 3.6 moles
Aluminium metal reacts with oxygen to produce aluminium oxide.
How
many grams of oxygen will be required to react completely with 0.3 moles of
aluminium?
Solution ) Moles of
Al = 0.3
Grams of O2 used = ?
The balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
AAI.
30,.) ———
2Al,O 3 (s)
According to this equation
4 moles of aluminium need oxygen
= 3.0 moles
1.0 mole of aluminium will need oxygen
7 7
0.3 moles of aluminium will need oxygen
= 7 x 0.3
= 0.225 moles
1 mole of oxygen (O2) has molar mass
= 32g
0.225 mole of oxygen (O2) willhavemolarmass
= 32x 0.225
=7.29
Example 4
How many molecules of water will be produced if we react 5 g of hydrogen
gas with excess of oxygen gas?
(STEED Mass of H, used = 5g
Molecules of water produced = ?
The balanced chemical equation for the reaction:
2H = +
Org)
2 moles
1.mole
32g
21,05
2 moles
369g
According to this equation
4g of hydrogen produce H,O
= 36g of H,O
5 g of hydrogen will produce H,O
= — x5 = 45g of HO
18g (1 mole) of HO contain molecules
= 6.022 x 10”
36g of H,O contain molecules
= 6.022 x 10 x 2
= 12.04 x 10”
45g of H,O contain
= = x 12.04 x 10”
= 1.505 x 10” molecules
Molecular formula of an element or a compound shows the actual number of atoms
present in the molecule of the element or a compound.
The formula of a compound which gives the minimum ratio present between its
atoms is called its Empirical formula.
All the ionic compounds and some of the
covalent compounds are represented by their empirical formulas.
| Chemical formula of a binary ionic compounds can be written if you know their names
and the charges present on the ions.
Chemical formula of a compound is n times its empirical formula where n is the ratio
of molar mass to empirical formula mass.
Avogadro's number has been calculated to know the mass ratio of reactants and
products in a chemical reaction.
The value of this number is 6.022. x 107%.
The quantity of an element or a compound, which contains Avogadro's number of
particles, is called a Mole and the mass of a substance present in it is called the Molar
Mass.
A chemical equation tells the reacting and producing elements or compounds in a
chemical reaction.
It also tells the mole ratio between reactants or products and
between reactants and products.
A chemical equation must be balanced and should
show the correct formulas of all the participating elements and compounds.
The mole ratio between reactants and products as shown by a chemical equation
enables us to find out the mass ratio of these substances.
A chemical equation is used
to calculate the masses of the reactants as well as the products, which take part in a
chemical reaction.
Exercise Wap
Tick(“’),the correct answer.
(i)
How many atoms are present
in one gram of H20?
(ii)
(a) 1002 x 1073 atoms
(b) 6.022 x 1073 atoms
(c) 0.334 x 1073 atoms
(d) 2.004 x 1073 atoms
Which is the correct formula of calcium phosphide?
(a)
CaP
(b) CaP2
(c) CazP3
(iii)
(d) Ca3P2
| Howmany atomic mass units (amu) are there in one gram?
(a)
Tamu
(b) 10 amu
(c) 6.022 x 10 amu
(iv)
(d) 6.022 x 10” amu
| Structural formula of 2-hexene is CH3— CH = CH — (CH2)2 — CH3.
What will
be its empirical formula?
(b) CH
(d) CH2
(a) C2H2
(c) CeHi2
(v)
(vi)
How many moles are there in 25 g of H2SO,?
(a)
0.765 moles
(b)
0.51 moles
(c)
0.255 moles
(d)
0.4moles
A necklace has 6g of diamonds in it.
What are the number of carbon
atoms
in it?
(vii)
(a) 6.02 x 10”
(b) 12.04 x 10”
(c) 1.003 x 10”
(d) 3.01 x 10”
What is the mass of Al in 204g of aluminium oxide, Al,O,,.
(a) 26g
(viii)
(b) 27g
(c) 54g
(d) 108g
Which one of the following compounds will have the highest percentage
of the mass of nitrogen?
(a) CO(NH,),
(ix)
(b) NH,
(c) NH,
(d) NH,OH
When one mole of each of the following compounds is reacted with
oxygen, which will produce the maximum amount of Co,?
(x)
(a) Carbon
(b) Diamond
(c) Ethane (C,H,)
(d) Methane (Ch,)
What mass of 95% CaCO, will be required to neutralize 50 cm’ of 0.5M HCI
solution?
(a) 9.5g
(b) 1.25g
(c) 1.32g
(d) 1.45g
Questions for Short Answers
Write down the chemical formula of barium nitride.
Find out the molecular formula of a compound whose empirical formula is
CH,O andits molar mass is 180.
How many molecules are presentin 1.5 g H,O?
Whatis the difference between a mole and Avogadro's number?
Write down the chemical equation ofthe following reaction.
Copper + Sulphuricacid — Coppersulphate + Sulphur dioxide + Water
Constructed Response Questions
Different compounds will never have the same moleculer formula but they
can have the same empirical formula.
Explain
Write down the chemical formulas of the following compounds.
Calcium phosphate, Aluminium nitride, Sodium acetate, Ammonium
carbonate and Bismuth sulphate.
Why does Avogadro's number have an immense importance in chemistry?
When 8.657g of a compound were converted into elements, it gave 5.217g
of carbon, 0.962g of hydrogen and 2.478g of oxygen.
Calculate the
percentage of each element present in this compound.
How can you calculate the masses of the products formed in a reversible
reaction?
Descriptive Questions
Which conditions must be fulfilled before writing a chemical equation for a
reaction?
Explain the concepts of Avogadro's number and mole.
How many grams of CO, will be produced when we react 10 g of CH, with
excess of O, according to the following equation?
CHig
> CO,4
2HO4
How many moles of coal are needed to produce 10 moles of CO according to
the following equation?
3C, + Or +
> Hag + 3CO.
How much SO, is needed in grams to produce 10 moles of sulphur?
2H,S
Vi.
SOs
2H,0,
3S,
How much ammonia is needed in grams to produce 1 kg of urea fertilizer?
2NH5 aq)
Vii.
~CO> fag)
CO(NH,),«)
HO,
Calculate the number of atoms in the following.
(a) 3g of Ha
(b) 3.4molesofN2 | (c) 10g of CgH120c.
Investigative Questions
It is generally believed that drinking eight glasses of water every day is
required to keep oneself hydrated especially in the summer.
If a glass
occupies 400 cm? of water on the average, how many moles of water are
needed fora single adult?
The chemical formula for sand is SiOz but the sand does not exist in the form
of discrete molecules like H20.
How has its formula been determined
keeping in view its structure?

[Chapter 5]

After studying this chapter, students will be able to:
Explain the idea of a chemical system and its connection with its surroundings
influences energy transfer during a chemical reaction.
Differentiate between exothermic and endothermic reactions by giving examples.
State that thermal energy is called enthalpy change and recognize its sign as negative
for exothermic and positive for endothermic reactions
Define activation energy as the minimum energy that colliding particles must have for
a successful collision.
Explain that activation energy depends on reaction pathway which can be changed
using catalysts or enzyme (detailed pathways not required)
Draw, label and interpret reaction pathway diagram for exothermic and endothermic
reaction which includes enthalpy change, activation energy (uncatalyzed and
catalyzed), reactants and products
Recognize that bond breaking is endothermic and bond making is exothermic
processes.
Explain that enthalpy change is sum of energies absorbed and released in bond
breaking and bond forming
Calculate enthalpy change of a reaction given bond energy values
Explain how respiration (aerobic and anaerobic), an exothermic process, provides
energy for biological systems and lipids as reserve stores of energy.
Energy exists in different forms which are often interconvertable.
In
chemical energetics we are mainly concerned with two forms of energy.
Chemical Energy: This energy is stored in a molecule in which atoms are
bonded to each other.
Heat Energy:
This form of energy is released when a bond is formed
and absorbed when it is broken.
In energetics we study the energy changes that take place during a
chemical reaction.
These changes are caused by the making and breaking of
bonds during a reaction.
In most of the reactions the weak bonds of reactants
break while in products new strong bonds are formed.
Since energy is needed to
break a bond while energy is evolved when a bond is formed, such reactions take
place always with the evolution of heat.
If a reaction is accompanied with the
evolution of heat it is called an exothermic reaction and if heat is absorbed
during a reaction it is called an endothermic reaction.
In energetics we not only encounter heat which comes out of a chemical
reaction but also another quantity which is called enthalpy.
Enthalpy (H) or heat content, is defined as the total amount of thermal
energy stored ina compound.
The unit of its measurementis kJ mol".
When the energy is absorbed during a reaction, the total enthalpy of the
system increases.
When energy is evolved during a reaction, the total enthalpy of
the system decreases.
Chemical energetics is part of a broader field of
chemistry called Thermodynamics.
In energetics we
Thomas Young was
study the flow of energy in a chemical reaction.
the first to use the
\worg ‘energy’ to the
Thermodynamics deals with the energy changes
fiaiq of physics in
during chemical reactions and how these changes
499.
affect the properties ofa chemical system.
[Topic 5.1 System and Surounding]
In Chemistry, any physical or chemical change under study may also be
called a system.
The chemical reaction includes reactants, products, catalyst,
solvent and anything else which is important to study this reaction.
Everything
else which does not fall in this system is called the surrounding.
For example, if
you are boiling water in the beaker, the water molecules will be called a system
while everything surrounding this like beaker, burner, etc. will be called the
surrounding.
When energy is transferred from surrounding to the system, the
change is called endothermic and it has a positive sign.
When energy is
transferred from system to surrounding, the change is called exothermic and it
carries a negative sign, Fig. (5.1).
{1,
vil
Energy evolved during a chemical reaction is used in everyday life for cooking,
heating, lighting, transportation and much more.
Surrounding
Surrounding
Exothermic
—j~—>
Surroundings get cooler
Surroundings get warmer
System and surrounding exchanging energy
Does boiling water in a beaker endothermic or exothermic change?
Which
form of energy is being transferred in this system.
important because
we
ca
us howm
useful wor
eat prese in a system.
Heat is
it.
[Topic 5.2 Enthalpy]
The total amount of heat energy present in a molecule under standard
conditions (0 C temperature and 760 mm pressure) is also called its heat content.
Enthalpy is the measurement of energy in a thermodynamic system.
The quantity
of enthalpy is equal to the total heat content of a system.
Enthalpy of a system is
represented by (H) while the change in enthalpy which a system undergoes is
represented by AH.
The total enthalpy (H) of a system cannot be measured
directly.
However, the change in enthalpy AH brought about in a system can be
measured comparatively easily.
In Chemistry, the standard enthalpy of reaction (AH ) is the enthalpy
change when reactants in their standard states undergo reaction to produce
products in their standard states.
This quantity is called the standard enthalpy
change or heat of reaction at constant pressure.
The reaction in this system is thus exothermic evolving 566 kJ of heat energy
which is given to the surrounding.
How is enthalpy different from heat?
Heat is a form of energy that flows from hot body to a cold body because
of a difference in temperature.
We measure heat in joules.
Heat is what we call the
transfer of thermal energy.
Contrary to this, enthalpy is an essential part of a
system since it depends on the number of molecules present in that system, its
chemical composition and its structure.
Heat is not essential part of a system, it
just comes and goes.
When heat leaves or enters a system, it results in a change of
enthalpy.
At a constant pressure the enthalpy change is equal to heat evolved or
absorbed.
Can energy be transferred in a form other than heat during a chemical
reaction?
Why it is not possible to calculate the enthalpy of a system?
[Topic Exothermic and Endothermic Reactions]
A physical or a chemical change is almost always accompanied with either
absorption or evolution of heat.
Heat, which is evolved or absorbed during a
chemical reaction, is called the heat of that reaction.
Chemical reactions in which heat energy is evolved are called exothermic
reactions while those in which heat energy is absorbed are called endothermic
reactions.
Heat, which is evolved during an exothermic reaction, goes to the
surrounding and the container in which sucha
reaction is being carried out, gets
hot.
Conversely, in an endothermic reaction, the absorption of heat from the
surrounding will decrease the temperature ofthe container.
Example: Hydrogen gas and oxygen gas react to give liquid water in an
exothermic reaction.
2H>
Hydrogen
Ose
Oxygen
———
2H,0O, + 571.6kIJ
Water
571.6 kJ heat energy is evolved during this reaction.
If the energy evolved
is shown separately it is expressed as AH = -571.6 kJ.
The same amount of energy
will be absorbed when the reaction will move in the backward direction i.e. water
will decompose to give hydrogen and oxygen back.
Example: Carbon dioxide gas is produced when solid carbon burns in oxygen
gas.
Oj]
Carbon
Oxygen
CO, + 393.5KJ
Carbon dioxide
It is also an exothermic reaction and 393.5 kJ heat energy is evolved
during this reaction.
When this reaction is carried out in the reverse direction, the
same amount of energy i.e. 393.5 kJ will be absorbed.
The enthalpy change (AH)
for this reaction is -393.5 kJ mol".
Both the reactions mentioned above are the examples of exothermic
changes.
The following reactions represent endothermic changes.
H 2 (g)
Hydrogen
m -
lodine
2H, —- 53.08k
Hydrogen lodide
The enthalpy change for the reaction is AH = 53.08 kJ
Hydrogen gas reacts with solid iodine only at high temperature and 53.08
kJ of heat energy is absorbed.
Formation of NO in air due to lightning in the clouds.
Nitrogen.
Os6
———
oxygen
2NO,
- 180.6k)
Nitric Oxide
The enthalpy change for the reaction is AH = 180.6 kJ.
Heat evolved or absorbed during a reaction is used in self-heating or self-cooling
packs.
These packs contain reactants that undergo an exothermic or an endothermic
reaction providing high or low temperature.
Our present-day living conditions depend heavily on the availability of
energy in its various forms.
Exothermic chemical reactions are extensively used
to fulfill this requirement.
In such reactions, chemical energy is converted into
heat energy.
We burn fuels like gas, oil and coal to cook food and for other
heating purposes in our homes and industry.
During this burning process called
combustion, substances present in fuels react with oxygen of the air
to produce a
certain amount of heat.
Foods such as fats and carbohydrates are important biological fuels.
During metabolism, the chemical energy present in this food is converted to heat
to keep us warm.
A large portion of electricity is produced at power stations by burning
fuels such as natural gas, oil and coal.
The heat which comes out from their
combustion is used to produce steam at high pressure.
This high pressure steam
is then used to rotate turbines, which in turn generate electricity.
While driving a vehicle, it is the combustion of petrol or diesel that gives
off energy and drives it forward.
The one example of exothermic reactions
people seem to enjoy the most is that of fireworks.
Fireworks are the result of
combustion reactions that yield heat, light and sound.
Different metal salts
alongwith oxidising agents produce a variety of colours when burnt, Fig. (5.2).
Why the chemical reaction between sodium metal and water proceeds
violently?
Ismelting of ice an exothermic or endothermic change?
Canexothermic reaction be reversed?
Let us now examine the reason why the chemical reactions are either
exothermic or endothermic.
A chemical reaction mainly involves the processes which involve bond breaking
and bond formation.
In the following reaction, the chemical bonds between the
atoms present in the molecules of H2 and O, first break
to give their atoms.
These atoms of hydrogen then form bonds with oxygen atoms to form
two molecules of gaseous H20.
Breaking of bonds of H, and O, absorb energy (endothermic process)
while making of bonds between H and O evolve energy (exothermic process).
In
this reaction, weaker bonds are broken i.e of H,.
Hence less energy is absorbed in
the system.
While the bonds which are formed in water molecule are stronger
and thus greater energy is evolved.
Hence, the energy which is evolved is more
than the energy which is absorbed.
The overall reaction is thus exothermic.
Since two moles of H, take part in the reaction so total energy absorbed in the
reaction
2Hy)
———~>
4H,
870K)
O.4 ———~
20,
498kJ/mol
2H + O24, ——— 4H, + 20,, + 1368 kJ
It means 1368 kJ energy is absorbed when2
Bond dissociation energy of H2
moles of H, and one mole of O, break their — j, 435 kJ/mol while that of O> is
bonds to convert themselves into atoms.
A98kJ/mol.
Bond formation
energy of one O — H bond is
484 kJ/mol.
Nitrogen of the atmosphere reacts with oxygen to produce nitric oxide in the
presence of lightning.
This is because reaction is highly endothermic, so only lightning
can provide enough energyfor this reaction to take place.
Total energy evolved in the formation of 4O —H bonds.
20, +
4H——~> 2H,0,, - 1936
This is the energy evolved when two moles of water are formed from 4
moles of hydrogen atoms and 2 moles of oxygen atoms.
Thus for the formation
of one mole ofwater, the energy evolved will be 968 kJ mol".
Hence the overall energy evolved in this reaction is = —1936 +1368 = —568k) for
two moles of water.
2 Hy) + Oyy—_—> 2H,0, + 568k) or AH = —568 kJ
The enthalpy change for the formation of two moles of gaseous water is
thus —568kJ.
So the enthalpy change for the formation of one mole of gaseous
water will be
~ 968k)
2 mol
_ _ 284 kJ mol"
The experimental value of formation of gaseous water is -284.3 kJ which is
quite close to this calculated value.
Calculate the enthalpy change of the following chemical reaction.
Hag + logy
2H,
Bond energies of H,, |, and HI are 436,151, and -299 kJ mol’ respectively.
Calculate the enthalpy change for the formation of one mole of liquid water.
[Topic 5.4 How does a Reaction take place?]
A reaction takes place when the reactant molecules collide with each
other
to give a transition state.
Let us study the following hypothetical reaction.
A2 +B, ———— 2AB
Before mixing, the molecules of reactants A and B are in a state of random
motion separately colliding with each other and with the walls of container.
Kinetic energies possessed by these molecules are not the same.
Majority of
these molecules possess average kinetic energy but a few possess more than
average energy while yet others possess less than average kinetic energy.
The
molecules which possess more than average kinetic energy may also be called
excited molecules.
When the two reactant molecules are mixed together, all these
molecules start colliding with each other.
The collisions which result by
colliding molecules having average or less than average kinetic energies may
not be able to produce any result.
But when the two excited molecules from
both the reactants collide with each other they may be able to produce the
transition state as shown in the following .
Formation of Transition state
The transitation state is shown at the peak of curve in .
After a very
short period of time the transition state either returns to the reactants or to the
products.
The progress of the reaction can be shown in the form of the following
energy profile diagram drawn between path of the reaction and the energy of
the reactants and the products.
Transition state
Energy of both reactants
is taken as equal.
Energy
Reactants
Products
Reaction coordinate
Path of Exothermic Reaction
Washing clothes at 60 C uses almost twice the energy as at 30 C wash. 90% of the
energy used by the traditional electric bulb is wasted in producing heat.
The energy of the transition state is higher than that of reactants or
products because the bonds between the reactant or product molecules are
being cleaved progressively.
The energy absorbed bythe reactant or product
molecules in order to be converted into the transition state is called the
activation energy (E,) of the reaction.
The difference between the energy of
reactant and that of the product comes out in the form of heat representing
enthalpy (AH) of the reaction.
This graph represents the path of an
exothermic reaction .
A similar graph can be drawn for an
endothermic reaction .
Transition State
Endothermic
Reaction
Products
Energy
Reactants
+AH
| ———_—> Reaction coordinate
Path of Endothermic Reaction
Are energy diagrams useful?
Draw an energy profile diagram for a hypothetical reaction which does
not evolve or absorb heat.
An addition of the catalyst in a reaction increases the rate of reaction
because it changes the path adopted by the reactants whereby the activation
energy value of the reaction is substantially decreased.
As a result, more
reactants are now able to be converted into product molecules and hence the
rate of reaction will increase .
A catalyst is thus, defined as a substance that increases the rate of a
chemical reaction without itself undergoing any permanent chemical change.
For example, Ni acts as a catalyst in the hydrogenation of oil to give banaspati
ghee.
Platinum acts as a catalyst in the production of H, SO,.
Chlorine acts as a
catalyst promoting the breakdown of ozone.
Transition state without the catalyst
Transition state in the presence
of catalyst
na
Activation energy in the
presence of catalyst
Energy
Reactants
Products
———>
Path of Reaction in the absence and presence of a catalyst
[Topic 5.5 Aerobic and Anaerobic Respiration]
The process of respiration in human beings is a continuous process.
During this process, we breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbon dioxide.
Respiration also carries complex chemical reactions inside the human body.
This
process that occurs in the presence of oxygen is called aerobic respiration.
Aerobic respiration is an exothermic process and involves the following
reactions.
Glucose, in cytoplasm, 2Pyruvate
(CgH1206 )
“__ 6CO,, + 6H,O, + Energy
in mitochondria
Energy
Glycolysis
During glycolysis one molecule of glucose is split into two molecules of
pyruvate.
This process involves a series of reactions catalysed by enzymes, with a
net production of 2 ATP (Adenosine Triphosphate).
When cells of our body
require energy for performing the metabolic activities, they use this ATP and
break it down to get the required energy.
The food we eat undergoes digestion
in our body and the digested food molecules that are absorbed by the cells
undergo oxidation to produce energy.
In certain organisms like bacteria and algae respiration occurs in the
absence of oxygen and it is called anaerobic respiration.
This is also an
exothermic process and during this process glucose is converted into carbon
dioxide and ethanol with the evolution of energy.
Glucose,
in
cytoplasm
yroplasm Pyruvate
Absence of
Yeast
oxygen
Energy
C,H,JOH) + Cox)
Energy
Lipids are a group of organic compounds which include fats, waxes,
sterols, etc.
Lipids serve as an energy reserve within our body.
About half of the
fuel our body needs comes from lipids.
If you eat more food than you need ina
day, the excess food is stored as lipids in adipose cells.
In between meals and
during exercise our body relies on this resource to provide energy.
Glycogen is
the primary storage form ofglucose.
It is stored in the liver and muscles.
Any physical or chemical change under study is called a system.
Everything else which
does not fall in this system is called surrounding.
The total amount of heat energy present in a system at standard conditions is called
its heat content.
The quantity of enthalpy of a system is also called its total heat
content.
| Thestandard enthalpy of a reaction is the enthalpy change that occurs when reactants
in their standard states undergo reaction to produce products in their standard states.
Chemical reactions which take place with the evolution of heat are called exothermic
reactions while those which proceed with the absorption of heat are called
endothermic reactions.
_Achemical reaction always involves breaking and formation of chemical bonds.
When weaker bonds are broken while stronger bonds are formed, the reaction is
overall exothermic and vice versa.
A reaction takes place when the reactant particles collide to give a transition state
which then change into the products.
The energy needed by the reactant particles to change into transition state is called
activation energy.
Thedifference between the energy of reactants and that of products is called enthalpy
change of the reaction.
10.
The reaction is exothermic if the energy of the products is less than that of reactants
and endothermic if the energy of the products is more them that of reactants.
11.
Acatalyst increases the rate of reaction by decreasing its activation energy.
12.
The process of respiration in human beings takes place in the presence of oxygen and
it is called an aerobic respiration.
In some organisms, the respiration occurs in the
absence of oxygen which is called anaerobic respiration.
Exercise fs
Wap
Tick (v’) the correct answer.
(i)
The following reaction is an exothermic reaction.
Ho + Clp —unlight oH
From where does the energy come to break the bonds of H, and Cl,?
(ii)
(a)
Bycollisions between the molecules
(6)
From sunlight
(c)
From the surrounding
(d)
Bycollisions of the molecules with the walls of the container
Which of the following reactions has the least value of activation energy?
(a) H,. + Ya Ox)
(b) Co + Ox)
> HO,
> CO.)
(c) NaCl. + AGNOse)
(d) Ha) + lag
(iil)
AgCl, +
NaNoO,,,)
> 2H,
Formation of which hydrogen halide fromthe elements is an endothermic
reaction?
(b) HF
(c)
HBr
(d) HI
Whatare the products of anaerobic respiration?
(a)
ATP +CO, + H,O
(b) CO,
(c)
ATP + Ethanol + H,O
(d) Ethanol + H,O
+ H,O
Which reaction do you expect to be a reversible reaction?
(a)
(b)
Energy
(v)
HCl
Energy
(iv)
(a)
A+B
A+B
C+D
C+D
Path of Reaction
Path of Reaction
(c)
Energy
C+D
Path of Reaction
(vi)
Energy
(d)
C+D
A+B
Path of Reaction
What does it show when a chemical reaction is exothermic?
(a)
It shows the bonds which break are weaker than those are formed.
(b)
It shows the bond which break are stronger than those are formed.
(c)
Exothermic nature of the reaction is not concerned with bond
formation or bond breakage.
(d)
(vii)
(viii)
It shows that the reactants are more stable than the products.
When NaOH and HCl are mixed the temperature increases.
The reaction is:
(a)
| endothermic with a positive enthalpy change.
(b)
| endothermicwith a negative enthalpy change.
(c)
exothermic with a positive enthalpy change.
(d)
exothermic with a negative enthalpy change.
The average bond dissociation energy for the C-H bond is 412 kJ mol".
Which of the following process will have enthalpy change close to 412 kJ
mol’?
(ix)
(a)
CH yg)
Ca + 2H
(b)
CHa
Co + 2H
(c)
CHa
C,t+4Hq
(d)
CHa
—> = CHy + He
The average bond energies for 0 - 0 and 0 = 0 are 146 and 496 kJ mol"
respectively.
Find the enthalpy in kJ for the following reaction?
H— O—O— H, ——— H— O—-H,, + + O 0,
(a)
-102kJ
(b) +102kJ
(c)
+350kJ
(d) +394kJ
(x)
Why does the following exothermic reaction not occur?
C (Diamond) ——> C (Graphite)
AH= -3kJ mol"
(a)
Structure of diamond is more stable than that of graphite.
(6)
|= Diamond has strong covalent bonds than does the graphite.
(c)
The change from diamond to graphite has high activation energy.
(d)
Density of graphite is less then that of diamond.
Questions for Short Answers
i.
Whatis the difference between enthalpy and enthalpy change?
li.
Why is breaking ofa bond an endothermic process?
ili.
Depict the transition state for the following reaction.
H, + Cl, ———
> 2HCl
iv.
Draw the reaction profiles for two exothermic reactions one of which moves
faster than the other.
v.
Whatis the role of glycogen in our body?
Constructed Response Questions
i.
| Physical changes which usually occur around us are given in the table.
Write
down whether they are exothermic or endothermic.
Physical
change
Exothermic or
Endothermic
Physical
change
Conversion of
Conduction of
hydrated salt
electricity by metals
into anhydrous
Salt
Burning of
Dissolving ammonium
paper
chloride in water
Vapourizing
Formation of rain
liquid
from clouds
nitrogen
Evaporation
Dissolving sodium
of dry ice
carbonate in water
Exothermic or
Endothermic
Explain why the reaction between atmospheric gases oxygen and nitrogen
does not take place under normal conditions?
But in the presence of
lightning these gases react to give NO.
The reaction stops as soon as the
lightning stops.
A reaction between natural gas (CH.) and atmospheric oxygen does not take
place when you mix them.
As soon as you show a burning match stick, the
reaction starts immediately and then it continues until one or both of the
reactants is/are used up.
Explain.
Descriptive Questions
Find out the enthalphy change of the following reaction using the given
data.
N2 + O2 ————
2NO
Bond dissociation energy of N2 = 958.38 kJ/mol
Bond dissociation energy of O2 = 498 kJ/mol
Bond formation energy of NO = -626 kJ/mol
Explain the difference between the terms heat and enthalpy.
Explain why formation of a bond is always an exothermic process.
Explain the role of lipids in our body.
Explain the following terms.
Activation energy, Transition state, Aerobic respiration
Investigative Questions
Why is it essential to cook some of the food items while others we can eat
without cooking?
Why does fireworks look spectacular?
What type of chemical compounds
undergo chemical reactions during this activity?

[Chapter 6]

After studying this chapter, students will be able to:
Recognize that reversible reactions are shown by symbol and may not go to
completion
Describe how changing the physical conditions of a chemical equilibrium system can
redirect reversible reactions (Some examples can include: a. effect of heat on
hydrated compounds b. addition of water to anhydrous substances in particular
copper (II) sulfate and cobalt (II) chloride
State that reversible reactions can achieve equilibrium in a closed system when rate of
forward and backward reactions are equal.
[Topic 6.1 Reversible and Irreversible Changes]
In a chemical reaction, the reactants react to give the products.
The
reaction will continue until all the reactants or one of the reactants is converted
into product.
For example, the following reaction takes place immediately in an
aqueous solution to give the products.
Nacl (aq)
AQNO 4.4)
AgCl (s)
NaNOs,aq)
The reaction goes to completion and if stoichiometric amounts of the
reactants are used then no reactant species are present at the end of the reaction.
Such a reaction is called an irreversible reaction.
It moves in the forward
direction only.
In the majority of chemical reactions, however, the reaction does not go to
completion.
The products of the reaction react among themselves to give back
the reactants under the same conditions...
Such a reaction moves in both the
forward and backward directions under the same conditions.
The reactants react
to give the products and the products, in turn, react to give back the reactants.
The reaction is called a reversible reaction and it is denoted by a symbol =
which has two half arrowheads one pointing in each direction.
For example,
400 C, 200 atm
Noo + 3H =
Fe
= 2NH 3,9)
In this reaction, one mole of nitrogen gas reacts with three moles of
hydrogen gas under the given reaction conditions in a closed container to give
two moles of ammonia gas.
After its formation, the ammonia gas decomposes to
give the reactants back.
The reaction never goes to completion.
At any time, all
the three species are simultaneously present in the reaction mixture.
A reversible reaction, however, goes to completion if either one of the
products is withdrawn from the reaction mixture or being a gas, it escapes into
the atmosphere.
For example, calcium carbonate is decomposed by heating ata
particular temperature.
If the above reaction is carried out in an open container, the carbon
dioxide gas will escape into the atmosphere as soon as it is formed and the
reaction is forced to go to completion.
If, on the other hand, the reaction is
performed in a closed container, the carbon dioxide will react with calcium oxide
to give back the reactants.
Like chemical changes, physical changes may also be reversible in nature.
Copper sulphate pentahydrate (CuSO, 5 H20) is an important salt which is blue
in colour.
When this salt is heated strongly, its colour changes to white.
This
physical change involves the following equilibrium.
When white anhydrous copper sulphate absorbs moisture from the
atmosphere, it will turn blue again.
Similar to this, when cobalt chloride hexahydrate (CoCls 6 H2O), which is
pink in colour, is heated it is converted to anhydrous CoCl. which is blue in colour.
In the reverse reaction, the anhydrous cobalt chloride absorbs less
moisture, it is first converted into a dihydrate which is purple in colour.
This
dihydrate then further absorbs four more water molecules to become a
hexahydrate which is pink in colour.
Limited
CoCl
moisture
————_
Moisture
CoC, - 2H,O
CoCl, - 6H,O
Anhydrous Cobalt
Cobalt chloride
Cobalt
chloride (Blue)
dihydrate (Purple)
hexahydrate (Pink)
Take a few grams of blue coloured copper sulphate in a dry test tube.
First heat it gently and
then strongly for sometime.
Note down the observation.
Let the test tube cool down.
Again note down the observation.
[Topic 6.2 Dynamic Equilibrium]
If a reversible reaction is started by mixing the reactants, the reaction
moves in the forward direction only.
After some time when enough
concentrations of the products are built up, they react to give back the reactants
in the reverse reaction.
The reaction will keep on going in both the directions until the rate of
forward reaction becomes equal to the rate of backward reaction.
In other words,
the number of reactant molecules which will disappear as a result of forward
reaction becomes equal to the number of reactant molecules which will form as a
result of the reverse reaction.
The same will be true for the product molecules.
At
this stage, the reaction is said to be in a state of chemical equilibrium.
It appears
as if nothing is going on in the reaction vessel as the concentrations of both
reactant and product molecules do not undergo any change at this stage.
Since
the reaction did not cease at this state of equilibrium, rather it keeps on going in
both the directions, this state is called dynamic equilibrium.
The concentrations
of reacting species (reactants and products) remain constant at equilibrium.
“(Interesting Information! \
Vast deposits of coal are available in Thar, Sindh.
This coal can be used to
generate electricity.
When coal is made to react with steam, CO and Hz are produced.
These products then react by a reversible reaction called catalytic methanation to
yield methane.
Cy + HO]
COg + Hag
Water gas
Catalyst
CO.
3Hy KH
He
Elaborate an example of dynamic equilibrium which exists in this world
between the three physical states of water.
Dinitrogen tetraoxide (N,O,) is a colourless gas.
It slowly changes to
brown coloured nitrogen dioxide (NO,) at 100 C.
Predict how the
colour of the mixture will change if N,O, is kept in a sealed flask at
100 C.
100 C
Y= 2NO,,
Colourless
Brown
The time a reaction will take to attain the state of dynamic chemical
equilibrium depends upon the nature ofthe reaction and the conditions at which
the given reversible reaction is performed.
For a dynamic equilibrium to be set up, the rate of the forward reaction
must be equal to the rate of backward reaction.
This does not happen instantly
and for very slow reaction, it may take years.
Both the rates of formation and the
decomposition of ammonia are reasonably fast at around 400 C in the presence
of a catalyst.
This reaction will reach the equilibrium state within minutes after the
start of reaction.
The following equilibrium reaction takes 4 — 5 seconds to reach at the
point of equilibrium.
Electric current
2H,0,
2H +
Ore
[Topic 6.3 Changing the Physical Conditions of a Chemical]
Reaction
If a given reversible reaction has attained the state of dynamic equilibrium, it will
remain in this state for infinite time unless it is somehow disturbed.
A reversible
Adding or withdrawing one or more ofthe reacting species
wk wr
chemical system may be disturbed in the following possible ways.
Adding or withdrawing one or more ofthe product species
Changing the temperature of the reaction
Effect of the presence of a catalyst on a reversible reaction
Changing the pressure of the reaction if it involves reactants or the
products in the gaseous state
Consider
the following reversible reaction at equilibrium.
Nag
3H)
400 C
Catalyst
2NH 3(g)
The concentrations of all the participating chemicals will be constant at
the state of equilibrium.
At this stage if we add more Nz gas in the mixture, its
concentration will increase and the reaction will no longer maintain its state of
equilibrium.
To restore the equilibrium state again, nitrogen will react with
hydrogen to produce more ammonia.
This change will go on until a new state of
equilibrium is reached at which the concentrations of all the species will again
become constant.
These new concentrations will, however, be different from the
concentrations ofthe earlier equilibrium state.
Now let us disturb the equilibrium again by withdrawing some of the
ammonia gas formed.
As a result, its concentration will decrease.
To restore the
equilibrium state, more nitrogen and hydrogen will react to produce ammonia.
When the state of equilibrium is reached again, the concentrations of all the
species shall again become constant.
Effect of Changing the Temperature on the State of Equilibrium
The formation of ammonia is exothermic in the forward direction and
hence this reaction will be endothermic in the reverse direction.
Nig
Heat
2NH,,,
AH =—92.4 kJ/mole
If this reaction is at equilibrium and its temperature is increased, the state
of the equilibrium will be disturbed again.
The AH of this reaction is negative.
This
means that the total energy of the system containing No and Ha is higher than
that of ammonia.
The increase in temperature of this reaction at equilibrium will
push the reaction in the backward direction i.e. the reactants side.
Decreasing the
temperature will drive the equilibrium to the forward direction.
Effect of Change of Pressure on the Reaction at Equilibrium
Change of pressure will disturb the equilibrium state of only those
gaseous reactions in which the number of moles of the reacting gases will be
different from the number of moles of the gases being produced.
Since the
formation of ammonia gas meets such a condition, the state of its equilibrium
will be disturbed by changing the pressure exerted on the reaction mixture.
Nag + 3Hyq
2NH;3.
1 mole
3 moles
4 moles
2 moles
2 moles
In this reaction, 4 moles of reacting gases are producing two moles of
product gas.
If this reaction is at equilibrium and the pressure is increased, the
equilibrium will be disturbed.
To restore this, the reaction will move to that side in
which the number of moles are less i.e. forward direction.
The formation of
ammonia gas is thus favoured at high pressure.
Effect of the Presence of a Catalyst on the Reversible Reaction
At the stage of dynamic equilibrium, the rates of both forward and backward
reactions are equal.
A catalyst increases both the rates of forward and back reactions of a
reversible reaction.
So if a reversible reaction is carried out in the presence of a
catalyst it will decrease the time taken by the reaction to attain the state of
equilibrium.
Exercise: Let us consider another example of a reversible reaction at equilibrium.
Phosphorous pentachloride decomposes according to the following equation.
PCl4. =
PCI) + Chr
According to the equation one mole of the gaseous reactant is giving two moles
of the product gases.
The reaction is an endothermic reaction.
Keeping in view
the above description of the reaction, answer the following questions.
i.
Whatwill happen ifthe gas mixture is compressed?
li.
Whatwill happen if we add Cl, gas to the equilibrium mixture?
iii.
Whatwill happen if the temperature of the reaction is increased?
Industrial production of ammonia in Haber Process is a very useful
application of the phenomenon of chemical equilibrium.
Ammonia gas leads to the
formation of an important fertilizer urea.
The ability of ammonia gas to be converted
into its liquid form easily is used to drive the reaction to completion.
In this way,
practically 100% conversion of Nz and Hz; to NH3 is achieved.
The preparation of ethyl acetate is commercially very important
because it is used as a thinner in paint industry.
C,H,OH, + CH,COOH, =
Ethyl alcohol
dil.
H,SO,
Acetic acid
CH,COOGH;) + H,O,
Ethyl acetate
One way to get the better yield of the product ethyl acetate is to remove
water from the reaction mixture as soon as it is formed.
Suggest a suitable
method to withdraw water from the reaction mixture.
Key Points
Majority of chemical reactions are reversible reactions.
Reactants react to give the
products and the products, in turn, react or decompose to give back the reactants.
A reversible reaction never goes to completion.
However, it may be forced to go to
completion if one or all the products are withdrawn from the reaction mixture as soon
as itis or they are formed.
Physical changes may also be reversible in nature.
Areversible reaction will keep on going in both the directions until the rate of forward
reaction becomes equal to the rate of reverse reaction.
At this point the reaction is
said to be at a state of chemical equilibrium.
Since both the forward and reverse reactions keep on going at the state of chemical
equilibrium, it is called a dynamic equilibrium.
The concentrations of all the reacting
species remain constant at equilibrium.
The time a reaction takes to attain the state of dynamic equilibrium depends upon the
nature of reaction and the conditions at which the reversible reaction is performed.
A reversible chemical system may be disturbed either by adding or withdrawing the
reactants or the products and by changing the conditions of temperature, pressure
and catalyst.
"Exercise Map
Tick (v) the correct answer.
(i)
What will happenif the rates of forward and reverse reactions are very high?
(a) The equilibrium point will reach very soon.
(b) The equilibrium point will reach very late.
(c) The reaction will not attain the state of dynamic equilibrium.
(d) The reaction will be practically irreversible.
(ii) Predict which components of the atmosphere react in the presence of
lightning.
(a)
N, and H,O
(b) O, and H,O
(c)
CO, and O,
(d) N,andO,
(iil) An inorganic chemist places one mole.of PCI, ina container A and one mole
of each Cl, and PCI, in container B.
Both the containers were sealed and
heated to the same temperature to reach the state of equilibrium.
Guess
about the composition of mixtures in both the containers.
(a) Both the containers will have the same composition of mixtures.
(b) Container
A will have more concentration of PCI, than B.
(c) Container
A will have less concentration of PCI, than B.
(d) Both the containers will have zero concentration of its reactants.
(iv) CaO or lime _issusedextensively in steel, glass and paper industries.
It is
produced in an exothermic reversible reaction by the decomposition of lime
(CaCO,).
Choose:the conditions to produce maximum amount of lime.
(a) Heating at high temperature in a closed vessel
(b) Heating at high temperature in an open vessel
(c) Cooling itin a closed vessel
(d) Cooling itin an open vessel
(v) What condition should be met for the reversible reaction to achieve the state
of equilibrium?
(a) All the reactants should be converted into the products.
(b) 50% of the reactants should be converted into products.
(c) The concentrations of all the reactants and the products should become
constant.
(d) One of the products should be removed from the reaction mixture.
(vi) Why the gas starts coming out when you open acan of fizzy drink?
(a) Because the solubility of the gas increases
(b) Because the gas is insoluble in water
(c)
Because the gas is dissolved under pressure hence it comes out when
pressure is decreased
(d) Because the solubility of the gas decreases at high pressure
(vii) The following reaction is performed in a closed vessel.
CaCO,
CaO, + CO,
How the equilibrium will be affected if you increase the pressure?
(a) The forward reaction will be favoured
(b) The backward reaction will be favoured
(c) No effect on backward reaction
(d) No effect on forward or backward reaction
(viil) When a reaction will become a reversibleione?
(a) If the activation energy of the forward reaction is comparable to that of
backward reaction
(b)
If the activation energy of the forward reaction is higher than that of
backward reaction
(c)
If the activation energy of the forward reaction is lower than that of
backward reaction
(d) Ifthe enthalpy change of both the reactions is zero.
(ix) Is reversible reactionuseful for preparing compounds on large scale?
(a)
No
(b) Yes
(c) They are useful only when equilibrium lies far to the right side
(d) They are useful only when equilibrium lies far
to the left side
(x)
What will happen to the concentrations of the products if a reversible
reaction at equilibrium is not disturbed?
(a) They will remain constant
(b) They will keep on increasing
(c) They will keep on decreasing
(d) They will remain constant for some time and then start decreasing
Questions for Short Answers
i.
Howis dynamic equilibrium different from the static equilibrium?
ii.
How the following reversible reaction will be affected if its temperature is
increased?
2H,05
Electricity
Ore
How can you get the maximum yield in a reversible reaction?
How can you decrease the time to attain the position of equilibrium in a
reversible reaction?
What is the effect of increasing pressure on the following reaction at
equilibrium?
2NOq
Nog + Ore
Constructed Response Questions
Why are some reactions irreversible while others are reversible?
Why are combustion reactions generally irreversible?
Can you make an irreversible reaction reversible and vice versa?
How do you knowif a reaction is reversible or irreversible?
Do the phase changes in water (solid to liquid, liquid to vapour) reversible or
irreversible?
Descriptive Questions
How can you drive the reversible reaction at equilibrium?
(a) in the forwarddirection’
(b) in the backward direction
Explain how the rates of forward and backward reactions change when the
system approaches equilibrium.
Describe the effect of a catalyst on the reversible reaction.
How can a reversible reaction be forced to go to completion?
How does change in temperature affect the reaction at equilibrium?
Investigate
Study the effect of heat on hydrated copper sulphate Why does this salt look
coloured and why does it lose colour upon heating?
Synthesis of ammonia gas is very important industrially because it is used in
the preparation of urea fertilizer.
Explain the conditions you will use to get
the maximum yield of ammonia.
i

[Chapter 7]

Student Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter, students will be able to:
Define Bronsted-Lowry acids as proton donors and Bronsted -Lowry bases as proton
acceptors
Recognize that aqueous solutions of acids contain H* ions and aqueous solutions of
alkalis contain OH ions
Define a strong acid and base as an acid or base that completely dissociates in
aqueous solution and weak acid and base that partially dissociates in aqueous
solution. (Some examples include: Student writing symbol equations to show these
for hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid, nitric acid, and ethanoic acid.)
Formulate dissociation equations for an acid or base in aqueous solution.
Recognize that bases are oxides or hydroxides of metals and that alkalis are watersoluble bases
Describe the characteristic properties of acids in terms of their reactions with metals,
bases and carbonates
Identify the characteristic properties of bases in terms of their reactions with acids
and ammonium salts
Define acid rain.
Discuss effects of acid rain and relate them with properties ofacids.
[Topic 7.1 Acids and Bases]
Acids and bases have been known to mankind since centuries.
Acids have
been known for their sour taste like the taste of lemon and ability to change the
colour of litmus paper from blue to red.
There are many substances which
contain acids and hence taste sour, such as curd, tamarind, lemon and lime, etc.
Common examples of acids include acetic acid, hydrochloric acid, nitric
acid, sulphuric acid and tartaric acid.
Most of these acids, we come across in
everyday life, are available in the form of aqueous solutions as they can be easily
dissolved in water.
Acids are divided into two types on the basis of their occurrence: natural
acids and mineral acids.
Acids which are obtained from natural sources are called
natural or organic acids.
Mineral or man-made acids are prepared from minerals
like sodium chloride or sodium nitrate.
Common examples of mineral acids are
hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid and nitric acid.
Some common organic acids and their natural sources are given in Table (7.1)
Table (7.1) Some Common Organic Acids and their Sources
Organic acid
Natural Source
Acetic acid
Vinegar
Ascorbic acid
Amla, Guava
Citric acid
Lemon, Orange
Lactic acid
Sour milk, Curd
Formic acid
Ant sting
Oxalic acid
Tomato
Tartaric acid
Tamarind
In comparison to acids, bases are known for their bitter taste, slippery
touch and ability to change the colour of litmus paper from red to blue.
An alkali
is a base that dissolves in water.
Some common examples of alkalis are sodium
hydroxide (caustic soda), potassium hydroxide (caustic potash) calcium
hydroxide (lime water) and aqueous ammonia (NH,OH).
Both sodium hydroxide
and potassium hydroxide are extremely corrosive and can burn your skin.
Metal oxides are also basic in nature because they react with acids to form
salts and water.
Na,O is basic oxide because it contains oxide ion, O%, which is a
very strong base with a strong tendency to react with water to produce
hydroxide ions.
Na,O,,
H,0, ———>
2NaOH,,,
Other examples of basic oxides are calcium oxide (CaO), zinc oxide (ZnO) and
magnesium oxide (MgO).
Both acids and bases are known to cancel the properties of each other
when mixed together in equal amounts.
The reaction is called neutralization
reaction.
A salt and water are formed as a result ofthis reaction.
| Exercise ) Name some fruits which contain citric acid.
Activity 7.1
The following compounds are provided in the form of liquid or in the
form of their aqueous solutions.
Use blue and red litmus paper strips to show
whether these substances are acidic or basic in their aqueous solutions.
Substance
Acidic
Basic
Tap water
Battery water
Rain water
Soap solution
Tooth paste
Shampoo
Bleach
In what ways are mineral acids useful for us?
[Topic 7.2 Different Concepts of Acids and Bases]
Arrhenius Acids and Bases
Although the earlier definitions of acids and bases describe some
distinctive features of these substances, yet new and broader definitions were
needed to explain their chemical behavior on the molecular level.
Svante Arrhenius,
a
Swedish
Chemist,
suggested that acids and bases may be classified in
terms oftheir behavior in water.
According to him;
An acid is that substance which dissociates in
water to give proton (H’*) or hydroxonium ion (H,O).
Some typical Arrhenius acids are HCl, HNO,, H,SO, and
HCN.
HCl 20)
Similarly,
H,O
H;O (aq) +
Cl (aq)
a base is that substance which
dissociates in water to give hydroxyl ions (OH).
Svante Arrhenius
(1859-1927)
Some typical Arrhenius bases are NaOH, KOH and Ba(Oh)..
Water has an essential role to play in Arrhenius concept of acids and
bases.
Whenever an acid or a base dissociates in water, its molecules participate
in reaction by surrounding the resultant proton (H*) and hydroxyl ion(OH).
Since proton is very small in size and its charge density is very high, it forms a
strong bond with the lone pair of water molecule to give hydroxonium ion, H,O .
According to some reports upto | H**
four water molecules may surround the
i.
proton.
Similarly, hydroxyl ions are also
eee
esses H *—
H *
Arrangement of water molecules
surrounded by water molecules as shown
around H*
in the Figure (7.1).
Arrhenius also explained the
process of neutralization.
According to
him when a strong acid and a strong base
are dissolved in water, they completely
dissociate into ions.
&ee
—— H 5+
e %,
%,5
He*
How do chloride ions exist in water?
H>*
S
The hydroxonium ion and the hydroxyl ion then react to form water with
the evolution of heat.
The salt NaCl that is formed with water does not exist as solid crystals.
It
remains present in the solution in the form of hydrated spectator sodium ions
(Na‘*) and chloride ions (CI).
Mineral acids are generally very strong acids.
The strength of an acid
depends upon the extent to which it is ionized in water.
Hydrochloric acid ionizes
in water completely giving alarge amount of hydroxonium ions in water.
Sulphuric acid being a diprotic acid ionizes in two steps.
Contrary to mineral acids, organic acids ionize upto a very limited extent
and hence they are weak acids.
Glacial acetic acid has a percent ionization ofonly 0.132%.
It means that out of 1000 molecules of acetic acid, only 1.32 molecules
dissociate and the rest remain undissociated.
Similarly, the percent ionization of formic acid having concentration
1.50M is 1.06%.
Which means 987 molecules out of 1000 remain undissociated.
NaOH and KOH are the examples of strong bases because they also ionize
completely in water.
NH,OH and Al(OH); are the examples of weak bases because they only
partially ionize in water.
NH,OH (aq)
NH, ea " OH,
(aq)
Why does ammonium hydroxide only
partially ionize in water?
{t,
vil
Stomach Acidity
Stomach acidity or hyperacidity conditions are a common problem.
Most
often the problem arises when a person takes fatty and spicy foods which cause
more acid to produce in the stomach than required.
Our stomach produces hydrochloric acid to digest the food that we eat.
Whenever we eat, cells within the lining of the stomach produce acid.
Problem
occurs when these cells produce more acid than your stomach needs.
When it
happens, the person suffers from stomach acidity.
The common indication of sucha
condition is the feeling of burning sensation right below our breast bone.
A person
may also feel sour taste in mouth and heart burn or pain near the heart area.
The
uneasy condition may easily be cured by taking weak bases like calcium hydroxide
and magnesium hydroxide commonly known as antacids.
These antacids remove
minor stomach disorders by neutralizing the stomach acid, but the concentration of
hydroxyl ions in them is too lowto harm the throat or stomach.
[Topic 7.3 Bronsted — Lowry concepts of Acids and Bases]
Arrhenius concept of acids and bases is very simple and easily
understandable but it has its own limitations.
For example, NazCOs3, K2zCO3 and
NH; do not contain any hydroxyl group which will get ionized by water but all
these compounds behave as bases and yield OH’ in water.
Arrhenius definitions
also require that water must be present as a solvent in order for a compound to
behave as an acid or a base.
It was realized that a broader definition for acids and
bases was needed to cover all the aspects of the concept.
To remove the limitations of
Arrhenius concept, Bronsted and
Lowry gave the following definitions
of acids and bases:
An acid is a substance that
donates
a proton.
This definition requires that to
behave as an acid a compound must
have a
proton to donate.
The
condition of the presence of water
Johannes N.
Bronsted
Thomas M.
Lowry
(1879-1947)
(1874-1936)
during this donation was, however,
eliminated.
All Arrhenius acids are, thus, Bronsted-Lowry acids as well for
example, HCI.
It dissociates in water to give H* and CI.
It also donates H* to H,O
forming H,0".
Abase is a substance that accepts a proton.
For example, OH, CN, NH, and CI are all bases because they have the
ability to accept a proton.
Note that except OH’ all other species are not
Arrhenius bases.
All Arrhenius bases are, however, Bronsted-Lowry bases as well.
All Bronsted-Lowry acids and bases are not Arrhenius acids and bases.
NH, is not Arrhenius acid and NH, is not Arrhenius base.
According to Bronsted-Lowry, an acid base reaction is that reaction in
which a proton is transferred from a proton donor to its acceptor.
This reaction
may take place in gas phase or in the presence ofany solvent.
Consider the following reaction between hydrogen chloride gas and
liquid water.
HCl,
Acid
H,O .g
Base
In this reaction, HCl gas acts as an acid because it donates its proton to
water which acts as a base.
Similarly when ammonia gas dissolves in water, a proton is transferred
from water
to ammonia and ammonium ion is formed.
NH;
Base
H.0, ===
Acid
_~——OH-(aq)
Conjugate base
NH,
cecy
Conjugate acid
Ammonia is a base while water is an acid in this reaction.
Water has the
ability to act both as an acid or a base depending upon the other compound with
which it reacts.
Water is therefore called an amphoteric compound which means a
compound that can behave both as an acid and a base.
In the reverse reaction, OH is a base because it accepts a proton donated
by the acid NH,’.
In order to differentiate, OH is called the conjugate base while
NH,” the conjugate acid.
Some other examples of Bronsted-Lowry acids and bases.
Give two examples of Bronsted—Lowry bases which are not bases
by Arrhenius definition.
[Topic 7.4 Properties of Acids and Bases]
Properties of acids and bases vary depending upon the substances they
react with.
For example, acids react with metals to produce hydrogen gas
whereas bases do not react with metals.
a.
Acids give the following three types of reactions.
With alkalis or metal oxides, they form salts and water.
Withreactive metals (Mg, Zn) they form salts and evolve hydrogen gas.
The less reactive metals Cu, Ag, Au, and Pt do not evolve hydrogen gas
with acids.
Activity 7.2
Take a few granules of zinc in a clean test tube.
Add dilute H,SO, in it
and heat it gently.
Identify the gas evolved in this reaction by taking a
burning match stick near the mouth of test tube.
Note the observations in
your notebook.
They decompose metal carbonates and hydrogen cabonates evolving
carbon dioxide gas.
b.
Properties of Bases
As already mentioned alkalis are those bases which are soluble in water.
Examples of alkalis are NaOH, KOH etc.
Ca(OH), is sparingly soluble in water
while Cu(OH)> is insoluble.
Apart from reacting with acids in neutralization reactions, alkalies also
react with ammonium salts and liberate ammonia gas
Activity 7.3
How to clean a blocked drain?
Blocked drains are one of the most common problems that we face
every other day.
Different blockages require different chemicals to remove
them.
One of the ways to clean the drain is to pour half a cup of sodium
bicarbonate solution into the drain followed by half a cup of vineger.
Cover
the drain and wait for thirty minutes.
Pour boiling water down the drain.
Caustic chemical drain cleaners are capable of dissolving grease, hair,
food and other common blockages.
Pour down the caustic cleaner into your
drain.
Wait for half an hour and then flush your drain with water.
[Topic 7.5 Acid Rain and its Effects]
When rain water has pH between 4.2 — 4.4, it is called acid rain.
Burning of
fossil fuels release harmful gases in air.
These gases, SO2 and NO2 when mixed
with moisture present in air form acid droplets.
These droplets then fall on the
Ox)
S040)
H,0
2NO,,
2803)
2 SO3.0
H,SOx)
ground as acid rain.
HNO,,, +
HNO,,
Effects of Acid Rain
Acid rain causes a number of adverse effects on soil, plants, aquatic life
and human-made structures.
Acid rain makes soil more acidic.
It dissolves and washes away nutrients
present in the soil which are needed by plants.
Many plants cannot live or growin
an acidic soil.
It can damage vegetation and plants.
Acid rain can make water of the water bodies too acidic for aquatic
animals to live in.
Due to this, many lakes, rivers, ponds and streams no longer
have fish.
Acid rain and the dry deposition of acidic particles damage buildings,
statues, automobiles and other structures made of stone and metal.
Acids are those compounds which have a sour taste and which turn blue litmus red.
They also give hydroxonium ions when dissolved in water.
Bases or alkalis are those compounds which are bitter in taste, have a slippery touch
and which change red litmus blue.
They also form hydroxide ions when dissolved in
water.
In a neutralization reaction, an aqueous solution of an acid reacts with an aqueous
solution ofa base to give salt and water.
According to Arrhenius definitions, acids give protons in water and bases give
hydroxide ions in water.
Bronsted—Lowry define acid as a proton donor and base as proton acceptor.
Generally acids dissolve metals with the evolution of hydrogen gas.
They also
decompose carbonates and hydrogen carbonates.
Generally bases react with ammonium salts to evolve ammonia gas.
Exercise Wap)
ofi
Tick (v) the correct answer.
(i)
(ii)
Which acid is not used as a food or mixed with food?
(a)
Tartaric acid
(b)
Ascorbic acid
(c)
Citricacid
(d)
Formicacid
While baking, which gas is responsible for raising the bread and making it
soft?
(iil)
(iv)
(a)
Oxygen
(b)
Carbon dioxide
(c)
Nitrogen
(d)
Carbon monoxide
Predict the main characteristics of the reactions of metals with acids.
(a)
Metals are dissolved
(b)
Metals are converted into salts
(c)
Hydrogen gas is evolved
(d)
Allthe above mentioned characteristics are true
How many hydroxide ions, calcium hydroxide will release in water?
(a)
(v)
(b)
(c)
Zero
(d)
In a neutralization reaction between KOH and H3PO.4, how many
molecules of KOH wilhreactwith one molecule of H3PO,?
(a)
(vi)
(vii)
(b)
(d)
(a)
Tartaric acid
(b)
Citric acid
(c)
Stearicacid
(d)
Oxalic acid
Which,compound is formed when SO; is dissolved in water?
(b) H2SO3
(c) H2SO,
(d) H2S207
Which ofthe following contains oxalic acid?
(a)
(ix)
(c)
Which acid is used in the preparation of soap?
(a) SO3
(viii)
Tomato
(b)
Orange
(c)
Tamarind
(d)
Sourmilk
Which compound in the following reaction is behaving as a conjugate
base?
CH;COOH,,,
(a)
(x)
CH3COOH
H,0,. ——— CH,COO,,,,
(b)
H20
(c)
CH;COO"
H;0 .q
(d)
H30*
When a chemical reaction is carried out with a substance Z; a gas is
produced which turns red litmus paper blue.
What is the reaction?
(a)
Reaction of an acid with a metal carbonate
(b)
Reaction of an acid with metal hydrogen carbonate
(c)
Reaction of an alkali with an acid
(d)
Reaction of an alkali with ammonium salt
Questions for Short Answers
Choose Arrhenius Acids among the following compounds.
HF, NH,, H,SO,, SO,, H,S, H,O
How does calcium metal react with dilute H,SO,?
Which salt is formed when HCI reacts with BaCO,?
How will you justify that HSO”, is a Bronsted — Lowry acid?
Why is HCI not edible although it is present in the stomach and responsible
for digestion of food?
Constructed Response Questions
What chemical name will you give to soap as
acompound?
In the presence of a drop of an acid, water is known to ionize as follows:
H,0, == Hg
OH(aq)
In your opinion, which name will be suitable for water: an acid, a base or
both?
Why does Na,CO, behave like a base in water?
Is NaHCO, a base or an acid?
Justify your answer.
What is the difference between a strong acid and a concentrated acid?
Descriptive Questions
Explain Arrhenius concept of acids and bases.
Compare Arrhenius and Bronsted — Lowry concepts of acids and bases.
How does sulphuric acid react with the following compounds?
NH,Cl, NH,NO,, MgO, MgCO,
What happens whena base reacts with a non-metallic oxide.
What do you
infer about the nature of non-metallic oxide?
State the reason of showing acidic character by both dry HCl gas and HCl
solution in water.
Differentiate between an acid and its conjugate base.
Investigative Questions
Acids play significant roles within human body.
Comment on this statement.
What is observed when CO, is passed through lime water (i) for a short
duration (ii) foralong duration?
By
bey Alkali metals
BB Other nonmetals
bf Metalloids
| | Transition metals
wa Actinoid elements
a) Noble gases
| | Alkaline earth metals
a Post-transition metals
i+] Halogens
Lanthanides
fe [se]
il = [rafzetk
Tine

[Chapter 8]

Student Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter, students will be able to:
Define the periodic table as an arrangement of elements in periods and groups, in
order of increasing proton number/atomic number
Identify the group or period or block of an element using its electronic configuration
(only the idea of subshells related to the blocks can be introduced)
Explain the relationship between group number and the charge of ions formed from
elements in the group in terms of their outermost shells
Explain similarities in the chemical properties of elements in the same group in terms
of their electronic configuration
Identify trends in group and periods, given information about the elements, including
trends for atomic radius, electron affinity, electronegativity, ionization energy,
metallic character, reactivity and density
Use terms alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, halogens, noble gases, transition
metals, lanthanides and actinides in reference to the periodic table
Predict the characteristic properties of an element in a given group by using
knowledge of chemical periodicity
Deduce the nature, possible position in the Periodic Table and the identity of
unknown elements from given information about their physical and chemical
properties
[Topic 8.1 Modern Periodic Table]
The modern periodic table is based upon the arrangement of elements
according to increasing atomic number.
When the elements are arranged
according to ascending order of their atomic numbers from left to right in a
horizontal row, properties of elements are found repeating after regular
intervals.
This results in the form of a table in which elements of similar properties
are placed in the same vertical columns.
The horizontal rows of elements in the periodic table are called periods
while the vertical columns are called groups.
SEE
Atomic Mass
Atomic Number
In the modern periodic table, the electronic configuration of the elements
continues changing when we move from left to right in a period.
Due to this, the
elements in a period show a gradual change in the properties.
Against this,
elements present in a group possess similar electronic configurations in their
outermost shells.
Therefore, the elements in a group show similar chemical
properties.
As a whole the periodic table shows the repetition of the properties of
elements after regular intervals.
This trend is called periodicity in the properties.
[Topic 8.2 Salient Features of Modern Periodic Table
The horizontal rows in the modern periodic table are called periods.
There
are seven periods in total.
Each period except the first starts with an alkali metal
and ends at a noble gas.
Each period also represents the completion of a shell.
Since the number of electrons to be accommodated in a particular shell is fixed,
the number of elements in a period is also fixed.
The detail about the periods is
given in Table (8.1).
Table (8.1) Periods.in the Periodic Table
Period No.
Name of the
Number of
Period
Elements
Number of Shell
1st
Short
1st
2nd
Normal
2nd
3rd
Normal
3rd
4th
Long
4th
5th
Long
5th
6th
Very long
6th
7th
Very long
7th
being filled
In 6th and 7th periods, two series of fourteen elements each have been
accommodated.
Because of the space problem, these two series were placed at
the bottom of the periodic table to keep it in a manageable and presentable
form.
The first series starts after lanthanum (La = 57) and it is called lanthanides.
The second series starts after actinium (Ac = 89) and it is called actinides.
Together the elements present in these two series are also called rare earths or
f-block elements.
The vertical columns present in the periodic table are called groups.
There
are in total eighteen groups.
Elements present in a group resemble one another
in their chemical properties since they contain the same number of electrons in
their outermost shells.
Elements present in a group are also called a family and
each group has also been given a family name.
The distribution of electrons in the
outermost shells (electronic configuration) and other information about the
groups are given in the following Table (8.2).
Table (8.2) Electronic Configurations of Elements In The Outermost Shell
Electronic Configuration
Group No.
Family Name
In the Outermost Shell
Alkali metals
ns'
Alkaline earth metals
ns’
3 to 12
Transition metals
nd‘ ns’
Boron family
ns’ np’
Carbon family
ns’ np’
Nitrogen family
ns’ np”
Oxygen family
ns’ np*
Halogen family
ns’ np”
Noble gases
ns’ np
The groups 1 to 2 and 13 to 17 contain the normal elements.
In the normal
elements, all the inner shells are completely filled while the outermost shell is
incomplete.
The groups 3 to 12 are called transition elements and in these
elements the inner sub-shells are in the process of completion.
Elements present in the periodic table are also classified into blocks.
It
depends upon the type of the subshell which is being filled; s, p, d and f.
Elements of group 1 and 2 are called s-block elements because in them ssubshell of the outermost shell is being filled.
Similarly, elements present in
groups 13 to 18 are called p-block elements because p-subshell is filled in these
elements.
The d-block elements lie between the s and p blocks, while f-block
elements in the form of two rows lie at the bottom of the periodic table.
a
i
Mendeleev arranged elements in his periodic table in the ascending order of their
atomic masses.
Later on, Moseley arranged the elements in ascending order of their
atomic numbers.
wuiWnNsMjO}UdoaebSyAI]c)
2 O):
-~O
BBh-z|-8)-51-5 (8) 21 eal]
| |e Bae
s21eBi
re} e8] 8] AS!
=| failed
JeWqouilny JjuosqwalizA
A
E.G.
Mazurs collected 700 different published versions of the periodic table.
Many
forms retain the regular rectangular structure.
Some forms had spirals, circles and
triangular shapes.
(1)
The electronic configuration of the outermost shell of an element is s’p*.
Find out
period number and the group number of the element.
In which block will you place
this element?
(2)
What is the group of the element having eight electrons in its outermost shell?
In
which physical state does this element exist?
(3)
Anelement belongs to 16th group and it is a gas.
To which period does it belong?
[Topic 8.3 Similarities in the Chemical Properties of Elements
in the Same Group
The chemical properties of elements depend largely upon the number of
electrons present in their outermost shells.
Since in a group of the periodic table
all the elements have the same number of electrons in the outermost shell, they
are expected to show similar chemical properties.
All elements of group | have one electron in their outermost shells, so they
show a strong tendency to lose their electron forming cations.
They are thus
known as electropositive metals.
These metals react vigorously with water
producing hydrogen and giving alkalies in the solution.
2Na,, +
2H,0 ,
——>
2NaOH ,,
Alkali
H
2 (g)
Oxides of these metals are also strongly basic in nature.
They are readily
soluble in water giving alkalies.
K,O,, +
H,Q, ——— 2KOH (aq)
Alkali metals also react with halogens giving halides.
2Na,. + Cl, ———>
2NaCl
The reactivity of alkali metals gradually increases down the group.
The second group elements also show a tendency to lose both of their
outermost electrons forming dipositive ions.
Mg. __ Mg", + 2é€
The tendency to lose electrons down the group increases due to gradual
increase in their atomic sizes.
The oxides of these metals are also basic in nature
and form alkalies in water.
CaO. + HO
1) —_—_> Ca(OH), faq)
All elements in group 17 have s*, p® configuration in their outer shells.
They show a strong tendency to gain one electron to become an anion.
They are
called electronegative elements.
These elements are very reactive non-metals
and form salts with metals.
Hence they are called halogens (salt forming).
Unlike
alkali metals, the reactivity of halogens decreases down the group.
Cl, + 2e
——— 2cl",
Ca. + Cl... —————>
CaCl,
Elements present in group 16 have s,p* configuration in their outermost
shells, so they have a tendency to accept two electrons to form a dinegative ion.
Oxygen behaves as a strong electronegative element.
0... + 2 ——> 20%.
Relationship between Group Number and Charge of lons
When we move from left to right in the periodic table, the main-group
elements tend to form cations having a charge equal to the group number.
For
example, group 1 elements form 1+ ions, group 2 elements forms 2+ ions and
group 3 elements form 3+ ions.
The number of charges on the cations also
correspond to the numberof electrons present in their outermost shells.
When we move from right to left in the periodic table, elements often
form anions with a negative charge equal to the number of group towards the
left side of the noble gases.
For example, group 17 elements (which are located
one group towards left to the noble gases) form ions with one negative charge.
Similarly the group 16 elements form ions with two negative charges.
The
negative charges present on these ions correspond to number of electrons
which these groups need to complete their octets.
[Topic 8.4 Variation of Periodic Properties in Periods and Groups
Periodicity in the properties of the elements occur due to recurrence of
similar electronic configuration in the outermost shells.
These properties include:
Atomic radius
il) lonization Energy
ili) Electron affinity
iv) Electronegativity
Atomic Radius
The electron cloud of an atom has no definite limit.
Because of this, the
size of an atom cannot be defined exactly.
However, it is possible to measure the
radius of
an atom when it is bonded to an identical atom.
Atomic radius is defined as half the distance between the nuclei of the two
identical bonded atoms.
It is expressed in pm(1pm = 10 m).
For example, the
distance between the nuclei of two bonded carbon atoms is 154 pm.
Half of this
distance i.e. 77pm is therefore the radius of carbon atom.
This is also called
covalent radius of carbon atom.
Variation of Atomic Radius in Periods
When we move from left to right in a period, the size of atoms decreases
generally.
It is because as we go from lithium (Li) to neon (Ne) in the second
period, we are adding electrons to the outermost shell.
The charge on the
nucleus also increases from +3 to +10.
This tends to pull the electrons closer to
the nucleus and hence the sizes of atoms decrease from lithium to neon Table
(8.4).
Table(8.4) Atomic Radii of Second Period Elements
2nd period elements |
Atomic Radii (pm)
Be
C
N
O
152 | 113 | 88
T7/
Variation of Atomic Radius in Groups
The atomic radii of atoms increase from top to bottom in a group.
It is
because a new shell is being added in the successive period down the group and
the inner electrons shield the outermost electrons from the nucleus Table (8.5).
Table (8.5) Atomic Radii of First Group Elements
First Group
No. of electrons in
Atomic Radius
Na
K
Elements
the Inner Shells
(pm)
Although you might expect atoms to become larger with the increase in their atomic
numbers, this does not always occur because the size of an atom is determined by the
diameter of its electron shells.
lonization Energy
lonization energy is the amount of energy required to remove the most
loosely bound electron from the valence shell of an isolated gaseous atom.
When there is only one electron present in the valence shell, the energy required
to remove it will be called first ionization energy.
It is expressed in kJ mol”.
For
example, the first ionization energy of sodium atom is +496 kJ mol".
Na
——~
Na’
+496kJ mol’
When there are more than one electrons in the valence shell, they can be
removed one by one providing more and more energy.
For example, Mg has two
electrons in its outermost shell.
It is easier to remove the first electron from
magnesium than the second one.
Mg. ——~ Mg", +
+737 kJ mol"
Mg"g——> Mg” + &
A
+1450 kJ mo!’
lonization energy value is related to the atomic size.
The smaller
the radius
of an atom, the stronger the attraction between the nucleus and the outer
electrons and higher the value for ionization energy.
The ionization energy
values thus increase from left to right in a period and decrease from top to
bottom ina group.
Table (8.6) and Table (8.7).
Table (8.6) lonization Energies of Elements of Second Period
2nd period elements
| Be
C
N
O
| Ne
lonization energy (kJ mol’) | 520 | 899 | 801 | 1086] 1402 | 1314 | 1681 | 2081
Table (8.7) lonization Energies of Elements of First Group
First Group Elements
lonization Energy
(kJ mol")
Na
K
Electron Affinity
Electron affinity is the amount of energy change when an electron is
added up in the outermost shell of an isolated gaseous atom.
For example, 328
kJmol" energy is released when an electron enters in the fluorine atom.
F.
——> F',
-328 kJmol"
Electron affinity values are also related to the sizes of the atoms.
The
smaller the size of an atom, the higher the force of attraction with which the
nucleus will attract the entering electron and hence higher is the value of
electron affinity.
Table (8.8)
Table (8.8) Electron Affinities of Group 17 Elements
Group 17 Elements
Electron Affinity (kJ mol")
-328
Cl
-349
-324.6
-295.2
In a group, the electron affinity values decrease from top to bottom
because the sizes of atoms increase down the group.
In a bigger atom, the
nucleus will attract the incoming electron with a weaker force and hence the
electron affinity will also be low.
Things to Know
While first electron affinities can be negative or positive,
second electron affinities are always positive.
Electronegativity
Electronegativity of an atom is its electron-attracting ability.
It is defined
as the force with which an atom attracts the shared pair of electrons towards
itself in a bond.
Electronegative atoms are those whose outer electrons are
attracted by a large nuclear charge.
It increases from left to right in a period and
decreases from top to bottom in a group.
Thus the most electronegative atoms
are found at the top right-hand corner of the periodic table.
The most
electronegative atoms are F,O,N and Cl.
Table (8.9) and Table (8.10).
The most
electropositive elements lie at the bottom left of the periodic table.
Table (8.9) Electronegativities of Elements of Second Period measured on Pauling scale
2nd period elements
Be
C
N
O
Electronegativity
1.0
1.6
2.0
2.6
3.0
3.4
4.0
Table (8.10) Electronegativities of Elements of Group 17 measured on Pauling scale
17th Group Elements
Electronegativity
Electronegativity is one of the most well-known property for explaining why chemical
reactions take place.
[Topic 8.5 Metallic Character and Reactivity
The metallic character is the tendency of an element to lose electrons and
form positive ions or cations.
Since the ionization energy decreases down the group, the elements have
increased ability to lose electrons.
For this reason both the metallic character and
reactivity increase down the group.
As we move from left to right ina period, the nuclear charge increases due
to a gradual increase in the number of protons in the nucleus.
Owing to this the
valence electrons are pulled strongly by the nucleus making it difficult for the
atoms to lose electrons.
Hence the metallic character decreases in a period from
left to right.
The chemical reactivity gradually decreases as we move from left to right
in a period.
For example, the second period starts with a very reactive element
sodium which is followed by the less reactive magnesium.
Aluminium and silicon
are less reactive than both sodium and magnesium.
This is because the number
of valence electrons increases, making it difficult to lose electrons.
Moving
further right in a period towards non-metals, the chemical reactivity gradually
increases again.
Things to Know
Metallic character of a metal generally
determines its level of reactivity.
It is mass of a substance in a unit volume.
Density of elements generally
increases from top to bottom in a group but varies less significantly from left to
right in a period.
It is expressed in g/cm’.
Table (8.11) Densities of First Group Elements
First group
Elements density
| 0.53
Na
K
| 0.97 | 0.89
1.63 | 1.879
(1) Baruim (Ba) is present in 2nd group and 6th period.
Answer the
following questions about this element.
(i)
Isitametal oranon-metal?
(ii)
Willit be electropositive or electronegative?
(iii)
Whatis the nature of its oxide?
(iv)
Inwhich physical state you expect this element to exist?
(2) In which group and period you expect to find an element with the
largest atomic radius?
(3) Can you predict the group number of the most electropositive and the
most electronegative elements?
(4)
Choose among the following the element having the lowest ionization
energy and the element with highest electron affinity.
Also assign its
group number and period number Li, K, O, F, Cl.
(5) Which two elements of the periodic table react to give
(i)
Abasic oxide and
(ii)
Anacidic oxide?
Key Points
Inthe modern periodic table, elements have been arranged in the ascending order of
their atomic numbers.
There are eighteen groups and seven periods in this table.
In the modern periodic table, elements have been divided into s, p, d and f blocks.
Each period starts with an alkali metal and ends at a noble gas.
A period also
represents the completion of a shell.
The elements present in s and p blocks are called normal elements whereas those
present ind
andfblocks are called transition elements.
All elements in a group are expected to show similar chemical properties because of
the same number of electrons present in their outermost shells.
Physical properties of the elements vary gradually as we move from left to right in a
period and from top to bottom in a group.
Atomic sizes of elements decrease from left to right in a period and increase from top
to bottom ina group.
_ lonization energy values increase from left to right in a period and decrease from top
to bottom ina group.
Electron affinity and electronegativity
values increase from left to right in a period and
decrease from top to bottom ina group.
10.
Metallic character increases from top to bottom in a group and decreases from left to
right in a period.
Exercise
+‘Tick(“) the correct answer.
(i)
Inewhich period and group will you place the element which is an
important part
of the solar cell?
(a)
Third period and 14th group
(b)
Second period and 14th group
(c) Third period and 15th group
(d)
(ii)
Third period and 16th group
Identify the electronic configuration of the outermost shell of a transition
metal.
(ili)
(a) ns*np*
(b) nd*ns?
(c) ns*np”
(d) ns*np’
= Whichis the softest metal?
(a) Na
(b) Ca
(c) Al
(d) Zn
(iv)
A yellow solid element exists in allotropic forms which is also present in
fossil fuels.
Indicate the name.
(v)
(a) Carbon
(b) lodine
(c) Aluminium
(d) Sulphur
How many electrons can nitrogen accept in its outermost shell?
(a)
(vi)
(ix)
(c) 4
(d)
Oxygen
(b) Chlorine
(c) Fluorine
(d) Nitrogen
Which element has the highest melting point?
(a)
(viil)
(b)
Which element is the most reactive element?
(a)
(vii)
Na
(B) K
(c) Rb
(d) Cs
In what order does the metallic character change in.the second group?
(a)
Mg > Ca> Ba> Sr
(b) Sr>Ba>Ca>Mg
(c)
Mg > Sr>Ca>
(d) Ba>Sr>Ca>Mg
Which of the following best describe thecorrect order of oxygen, fluorine,
and nitrogen's atomic radii?
(a) O<F<N
(x)
(b) N<F<O
(c) F<O<N
(d) O<N<F
The element having less valueyof ionization energy and less value of
electron affinity is likely to belong to:
(a) Group 1
(6) Group 13
(c) Group 16
(d) Group 17
Questions for Short Answers
Why was atomic number chosen to arrange the elements in the periodic
table?
Whatis the significance of the word periodic?
Why does the size of a period increase as we move down the periodic table?
In a group, the elements have the same number of electrons in the
outermost shell.
Why is it so?
Do you expect calcium to be more reactive than sodium?
Give the reason of
your answer.
Vi.
Which element has the maximum atomic radius and which element has the
minimum atomic radius in third period?
Vil.
Why are the most electronegative elements present in sixth and seventh
groups?
vill.
The first ionization energy value of magnesium Is less than the second one.
Give reason.
Is it possible for two metals or two non-metals to form an ionic bond?
Which element has the least value of ionization energy and which element
has the highest value of electronegativity?
Constructed Response Questions
Suppose a new element is discovered.
Where would you like to
accommodate this element in the periodic table?
What is the first element of the periodic table?
Will it lose an electron or gain
it?
Atomic radii of boron and aluminum are 88 pm and 125 pm respectively.
Which element is expected to lose electron or electrons easily?
How would you find the atomic radius of
an atom?
Why is it not possible for oxygen atom to accept three electrons to form O*
ion like nitrogen which can accept electrons to form N*?
Descriptive Questions
Which information is needed to locate the elements in the periodic table if
you do not knowits atomic number?
Is atomic mass helpful for this purpose?
How many blocks of elements are present in the periodic table?
Are these
blocks helpful in studying the properties of elements?
Explain the variation in the following properties in the periods giving
reasons.
(a) Atomic radius
(b) lonization energy
Which physical properties of elements may lead us to know what type of
bond it will form?
Write down the names of four non-metals which exist in solid state at normal
temperature.
Vi.
Why do second and third periods have equal number of elements while all
other periods contain different number of elements?
Investigative Questions
Arrangement of the elements in the form of a periodic table is a remarkable
achievement of chemists.
Comment on this statement citing the benefits of
this table.
Both lithium and beryllium show behaviour different from rest of the alkali
and alkaline earth metals respectively.
Can you think of the possible reasons
for this difference?
Modern periodic table is the amended formof the earlier table developed by
Mandeleev.
Elaborate how these two tables are different from each other.

[Chapter 9]

Student Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter, students will be able to:
Define group 1 Alkali metals as relatively soft metals with general trends down the
group limited to decreasing melting point, increasing density and increasing
reactivity.
Predict properties of other elements in group 1, given information about the
elements.
Predict properties of elements in group 1 in order of reactivity given relevant
information.
Define group 17 halogens as diatomic non-metals with general trends limited to
increasing density, and decreasing reactivity.
Identify the appearance of halogens at rtp as fluorine as pale-yellow gas, chlorine as
yellow -green gas, bromine as red -brown liquid, iodine as grey- black solid
Explain the displacement reactions of halogens with other halide ions and also as
reducing agents
Predict the properties of elements in group 17, given information about the elements
Analyse the relative thermal stabilities of the hydrogen halides and explain these in
terms of bond strengths
Transition elements
Describe the transition elements as metals that: have high densities, high melting
points, variable oxidation numbers, form coloured compounds and act as catalysts
for industrial purposes. (Some examples include catalysts being used are the Haber
process, catalytic converters, Contact process and manufacturing of margarine)
Define the Group 18 noble gases as unreactive, monatomic gases
Explain this in terms of electronic configuration properties of metals
Compare the general physical properties of metals and non-metals (Specifically in
terms of:
a. thermal conductivity
b. electrical conductivity
c. malleability and ductility
d. melting points and boiling points)
Elements present in a group of the periodic table show similar chemical
properties owning to the presence of same number of electrons in their
outermost shells.
However, a small variation in the chemical properties of
elements is expected because the atomic size increases down the group.
[Topic 9.1 Properties of Group 1 Elements]
All the elements present in group 1 have ns’ configuration in their
outermost shells.
They are also called alkali metals.
This single electron can be
removed easily which makes these metals very reactive except the first element
hydrogen which is a gas and a non-metal.
When we move from top to bottom in
this group, the atomic size increases.
Owing to this, it becomes easier for
elements to lose electron down the group which is reflected in the increased
reactivities of the lower members ofthe group.
Lithium reacts with water steadily giving hydrogen and lithium hydroxide.
Sodium reacts vigorously while potassium reacts violently with water giving their
2H,0,
2Na,
2H,0,
2K,
2H,O,
2Li,
2LiOH 4.
Fre
2NaOH,,
Hie
respective water soluble hydroxides.
2KOH (aq)
H 2(9)
Similarly, reaction of these metals with chlorine becomes more vigorous
as we go down the group.
Heat
2li,
Cly
2Na .,
Cla
vigorous reaction
Cl
violent reaction
Heat
Heat
LiCl,
2NaCcl.,
2KCl
Keeping in view the trends of reactivity in first group elements how would
they react with oxygen?
\ Al
Li, Na and K are lighter than water but rubidium sinks in water.
Cesium explodes on
contact with water, possibly shattering the container.
Increase in the atomic size down the first group also weakens the
interatomic attraction of the atomic metals.
This fact makes them softer down
the group and their melting points decrease.
As we go down the first group, both the size and volume of the atoms
increase as the number of electrons and protons increases.
But the increase in
mass of the elements is greater than the increase in volume; so the density which
is defined as the mass per unit volume increases gradually down the group.
Table (9.1)
Table (9.1) Physical Properties of First Group Metals
Metal
Na
K
Melting point C
Density g/cm?
0.53
0.97
0.86
1.53
1.87
[Topic 9.2 Properties of Group 17 Elements]
All the elements in the group 17 have seven electrons in their outermost
shells (n’,s’).
They are electronegative non-metals because they have strong
tendency to accept one electron to become an anion.
They exist as diatomic
molecules and behave as very reactive non-metals.
Atomic radii, melting and
boiling points of halogens increase when you go down the group.
This is because
the atoms get larger as they have more electrons.
As a result the molecules which
are formed from these atoms will attract each other with a stronger force.
This is
the reason why the melting and boiling points of bromine and iodine are higher
than those ofchlorine are fluorine.
Halogens react with alkali and alkaline earth metals to give salts.
These
elements are thus named as Halogens which means salt-forming elements.
Unlike metals, the reactivity of halogens decreases from top to bottom in the
group.
This is due to the fact that atomic size increases down the group and
tendency to accept electron from other atoms decreases making them less
reactive.
Fluorine gas is pale yellow, chlorine gas yellowish green while bromine is
fuming red-brown liquid. lodine exists as shiny grey crystals which easily turn
into dark purple vapours when they are warmed up.
Metal halides are formed when halogens react directly with alkali and
alkaline earth metals.
Metal halides behave usually as ionic compounds.
Oxidation is a process in which an electron is lost.
The substance which
loses an electron is called a reducing agent.
Na,
Na
On the contrary, reduction is a process in which an electron is gained and
the substance which accepts the electron is called an oxidizing agent.
Cl,
2
2cl
Oxidation-reduction are simultaneous reactions.
In other words an,
electron is lost only when there is a substance to accept it.
Halogens are oxidising agents and their oxidising power decreases down
the group.
Cl,
Bro
This fact gives a unique property to halogens when a halogen having
more oxidising power displaces an ion of another halogen from its compound.
Clo taq
2NaBr,,)
2NaCl.q)
Brag
Clo taq
2Nal,.
2NaCl.ag)
Brotaq)
2Nal aq
2NaBr,.)
lo)
Halogens react with hydrogen to give hydrogen halides.
Hydrogen
halides behave as strong acids in water.
All halides exist in gaseous state at ordinary temperature except
hydrogen fluoride which is a liquid.
Bond length between hydrogen and halogen
increases down the group because as the halogen atom gets bigger the bonding
pairs of electron get further away from the halogen nucleus.
The bond between
hydrogen and halogen therefore gets weaker.
The weaker the bond, the less heat
energy it will need to break it.
Hence the thermal stability of hydrogen halides
decreases down the group.
HCl
HBr
How do halogens react with water?
Water in swimming pool is sterilized with chlorine.
[Topic 9.3 Group Properties of Transition elements]
Elements present at the centre of the modern periodic table from group 3
to group 12 are called d block elements or transition elements.
All transition
elements are metals having the similar properties.
Transition elements are often
hard with higher densities.
Their melting and boiling points are also high.
These
metals show variable oxidation states and the compounds they form are often
coloured.
They are malleable and ductile.
Transition metals and their compounds function as catalysts in many
important chemical reactions.
Metals often absorb other substances on their
surface and activate them in this process. lron, a transition metal, is used as a
catalyst in one of the most important industrial reactions which gives ammonia.
It is called Haber process.
This ammonia is used to prepare urea fertilizer.
New
Fe
3 Hag)
> 2N Hy)
Platinum was originally used as a catalyst in the contact process for the
manufacture of sulphuric acid.
This expensive catalyst is, however, rendered
inactive due to the presence of arsenic as impurity in sulphur dioxide.
Vanadium
pentoxide (V2 Os) is now preferred as a catalyst.
25044) +
Ox)
SO;,
HO,
V,0
— > 2803.)
H,SO 40)
A catalytic converter is a device used in the exhaust of an automobile
which converts more harmful gases produced in the engine to such gases which
do not pollute the atmosphere.
Platinum, palladium and rhodium are the
catalysts used in catalyic converters.
A transition metal nickel is used as a catalyst for the hydrogenation of oils
to give solid margarine.
Margarine is less likely to spoil than butter.
Things to Know
Transition
metals have high tensile
strength.
What does it mean?
[Topic 9.4 Properties of Noble Gases]
Elements present in group 18 of the modern periodic table are called
noble elements.
All noble elelments are monoatomic gases having very low
boiling points, Helium (He), Neon (Ne) Argon (Ar), Krypton (Kr), Xenone (Xe) and
Radon (Ra).
All these gases have eight electrons (s*p ) in their outermost shells
except He which has s? electronic configuration.
Since their outer shells are
complete, they show very little chemical reactivity.
[Topic 9.5 Physical Properties of Metals and Non-metals]
Metals and non-metals can be distinguished based on their physical and
chemical properties.
Metals are defined as the elements which can generally form cations
easily.
They also tend to form metallic bond.
Metals can be hammered into thin
sheets.
This property is called malleability.
Metals can also be drawn into wires
and this property is named as ductility.
Metallic bonding in metals allows metals
to be the best conductor of heat and electricity.
Metals are lustrous which means
that they have a shiny appearance.
Due to high tensile strength metals can hold
heavy weights.
When metals are hit by an object, they make a ringing sound.
Metals cannot be cut easily because they are hard substances.
Due to the presence of strong metallic bond metals generally have high
melting and boiling points.
Their densities are also very high.
Alkali metals being
soft metals are treated as exceptions.
Example of metals include copper, silver,
iron, aluminium, gold, platinum, zinc, etc.
Non-metals generally gain electrons easily.
Non-metals show a greater
variety of colours and physical states compared to metals.
Non-metals cannot be
beaten into thin sheets because being brittle they break into pieces when
hammered.
Sulphur and phosphorous exist in powdered form and cannot be
made into sheets.
Non-metals cannot be drawn into wires without breaking.
Non-metals do not have free electrons due to which the bonds between their
atoms are weak and they break down when stretched.
As there are no free electrons so non-metals cannot conduct heat and
electricity.
Graphite is the only exception.
It conducts electricity because of its
special crystalline arrangements.
The electrons which are present between the
layers of graphite crystal are loosely held and hence they can become mobile.
The conduction of electricity of graphite is due to the mobility of these electrons.
g— 2, 29
#5 tg 8
: Graphite structure
Non-metals cannot be polished because they either exist in powder or
gaseous form.
Most of the powders are dull in texture.
Due to non-ductile and
non-malleable properties, non-metals are not strong at all.
Their bonds being
weak, break easily.
All non-metals have low melting and boiling points.
The
melting point of sulphur is 115 C.
Graphite and diamond have high melting
points and these are exceptions.
Non-metals have low densities as compared to
metals.
This means that in non-metals atoms are not strongly bound with each
other.
Examples of non-metals are oxygen, nitrogen, chlorine, sulphur, carbon
and bromine, etc.
vul
About 75% of all the elements in the periodic table are metals.
There are total 20 nonmetals which exist in solid or liquid or gaseous state at room temperature.
Comparison of the Physical Properties of Metals and Non-metals
Metals
Non-metals
Metals usually have high melting | 1.
Non-metals may be solids, liquids
and boiling points.
or gases at room temperature.
They show wide range of melting
and boiling points.
Metals are good conductors of | 2.
Non-metals are poor conductors
heat and electricity.
of heat and electricity (except
graphite).
Metals can be made into different | 3.
shapes by applying
Non-metals
are brittle.
pressure.
Metals can therefore be easily
drawn into wires and sheets.
Metals are usually lustrous solids | 4.
Non-metals are dull and cannot be
(except mercury).
polished (except iodine).
Metals are generally tough and}
strong.
Non-metals are neither tough nor
strong.
According to one report nine elements are facing serious threat of extinction.
Some of
these elements are arsenic, gallium, gold, helium and zinc.
Key Points
Atomic size increases from top to bottom for elements of group-1.
It becomes easier
for these elements to lose their single electron.
Chemical reactivity of the elements in group-1 increases down the group.
Due to increase in their atomic sizes, the interatomic attraction decrease down the
first group elements.
This makes them softer and their melting points decrease down
the group.
Due to increase in the size and volume of atoms, the densities of alkali metals
increases down the group.
Group 17 elements or halogens exist as diatomic molecules.
They are very reactive
non-metals and react with alkali and alkaline earth metals.
| Halogens are oxidising agents and their oxidising power decreases down the group.
In hydrogen halides the bond between hydrogen and halogen gets weaker as we go
down the group.
Hence, the thermal stability of hydrogen halides decreases down the
group.
d-—block elements or transition elements are all metals.
They are often hard and have
higher densities.
These elements and their compounds are used as catalysts in
important industrial reactions.
Noble gases are all unreactive gases because their outermost shells are complete.
10.
Metals and non-metals have very different physical properties.
Exercise
Bm)
Tick(v) the correct answer.
(i)
Whichhalogen will have the least reactivity with alkaline earth metals?
(it)
(iii)
(a)
Chlorine
(b)
lodine
(c)
Bromine
(d)
Fluorine
| Whichcompound do you expect to be coloured?
(a)
KCI
(b)
BaCl.
(c)
AICl3
(d)
NiCl2
| In which element there exists the strongest forces of attraction between
atoms?
(iv)
(a) Mg
(b) Ca
(c) Sr
(d)
| Elements of which group are all coloured?
(a)
Second group
(b)
Sixth group
(c)
Fourth group
(d)
Fifth group
(v)
(vi)
Which halogen acid is unstable at room temperature?
(a) HBr
(b) HI
(c) HCl
(d) HF
Which oxide is the most basic oxide?
(a) NazO
(vii)
(b) LizO
(c) MgO
(d) CO
Which group elements are the most reactive elements?
(a) Transition metal group
(b) First group
(c) Second group
(d) Third group
(viii) The following solutions of a halogen and a sodium halide are mixed
together.
Which solution will turn dark because ofa reaction?
(ix)
(x)
(a) Bro and NaCl
(b) Br2 and NaF
(c) Clo and NaF
(d) Cl2 and Nal
X is
amonoatomic gas, which statementabout this is correct?
(a) X burns
in air
(b) Xis coloured
(c) Xis unreactive
(d) X will displace iodine from it
Which property is correct for group 1 elements?
(a) Low catalytic activity
(b) High density
(c) Low electrical conductivity
(d) High melting point
Questions for Short Answers
Why does it become easier to cut an alkali metal when we move from top to
bottom inagroup |?
Predict the reactivity of potassium towards halogens.
In the following reaction, chlorine acts as an oxidising agent.
Which is the
reducing agent?
Clie
2NaBrag
2NaCcl (aq)
Brag
Why does iodine exist in the solid state at room temperature?
How does Ni catalyse the reaction involving hydrogenation of oil?
Constructed Response Questions
Which noble gas should have the lowest boiling point and why?
Compare the reactions of alkali metals with chlorine.
Why are almost all the metals solids while non-metals generally exist as
gases and solids?
Name any three elements in the periodic table which exist as liquids.
Why are transition elements different from normal elements?
Vi.
Compare the reactivity of chlorine and bromine as an oxidising agent.
Vil.
Which element is the most reactive and which is the least reactive among
halogens?
Give two reasons to explain your answer.
Descriptive Questions
Explain the role of catalytic converter in an automobile.
Why do the chemical reactivities of alkali metals increase down the group
whereas they decrease down the group in case of halogens?
Why are metals generally tough and strong whereas non-metals are neither
tough nor strong?
Both alkali metals and halogens are very reactive elements with roles
opposite to each other.
Explain.
Why hydrogen bromide is thermally unstable as compared to hydrogen
chloride?
Vi.
Compare the properties of metals and non-metals.
Vil.
V2.0; catalyst is preferred over platinum in the oxidation of sulphur dioxide.
Give reasons.
Investigative Questions
Explain the role of sodium as heat transfer agent in the atomic nuclear power
plant.
Which property of sodium is utilized in this role.?
Why and how does lithium behave differently from the rest of the alkali
metals?
Why aluminum metal is used in the manufacture of cooking utensils whereas
magnesium is not considered useful for this purpose?
a
Chapter
hg
Senvironmenta! _
(Chemistry,

[Chapter 10]

Student Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter, students will be able to:
State that composition of clean, dry air is approximately 78% nitrogen, Nz, 21%
oxygen, O2, and the remainder as a mixture of noble gases and carbon dioxide, COz
State the major sources of air pollutants (Some examples include:
a. carbon dioxide from the complete combustion of carbon-containing fuels
b. carbon monoxide and particulates from the incomplete combustion of carboncontaining fuels
c. methane from the decomposition of vegetation and waste gases from digestion in
animals
d. oxides of nitrogen from car engines
e. sulfur dioxide from the combustion of fossil fuels which contain sulfur compounds
f. ground level ozone from reactions of oxides of nitrogen, from car engines, and
volatile organic compounds, in presence of light)
State the adverse effects of air pollutants (Some examples include:
a. carbon dioxide: higher levels of carbon dioxide leading to increased global
warming, which leads to climate change
b. carbon monoxide: toxic gas
c. particulates: increased risk of respiratory problems and cancer
d. methane: higher levels of methane leading to increased global warming, which
leads
to climate change
e. oxides of nitrogen: acid rain, photochemical smog and respiratory problems
f. sulfur dioxide: acid rain and haze)
Explain how the greenhouse gases carbon dioxide and methane cause global
warming, (Some examples include:
a. the absorption, reflection and emission of thermal energy
b. reducing thermal energy loss to space
Describe the role of sulfur in the formation of acid rain and impact on the
environment.
Describe the strategies to reduce the effects of major environmental
issues (Some examples include:
a. climate change: planting trees, reduction in livestock farming, decreasing use of
fossil fuels, increasing use of hydrogen and renewable energy, e.g. wind, solar.
b.
Acid rain: Use of catalytic converters in vehicles, reducing emissions of sulfur
dioxide by using low sulfur fuels and flue gas desulfurization with calcium oxide).
Describe the role of NO and NO,(subscript) in the formation of acid rain, both directly
and through their catalytic role in the oxidation of atmospheric sulfur dioxide.
Explain how oxide of nitrogen form in car engines and describe their removal by
catalytic converters, e.g.CO + 2NO—2COz2 + Nao
Define photosynthesis as the reaction between carbon dioxide and water to produce
glucose and oxygen in the presence of chlorophyll and using energy from light.
Analyze how to use tools to reduce personal exposure to harmful pollutants (some
examples include the usage of masks, air quality indices and CO detectors).
Identify high risk situation in life including those where long-term exposure to these
pollutants can lead to respiratory issues and reduction in quality and longevity of life.
Introduction
The branch of Chemistry which deals with the study of chemicals and
other pollutants in the environment is called environmental chemistry.
It also
covers the adverse effects of these chemicals on living and non-living things.
Environmental chemistry is a part of environmental education.
The
objective of which is to enlighten the people particularly the students, about the
importance of protection and conservation of our environment.
The need for this
environmental education, both formal and non-formal, is keenly felt at the
national level.
Since the start of industrial revolution, human activities have played havoc
with the atmosphere of the Earth.
The gases which are released due to the
increasing use of fossil fuels (natural gas, coal and petroleum) have polluted the
atmosphere upto such an extent that it is difficult to breathe air in some areas of
metropolitan cities.
The excessive use of fertilizers, insecticides and pesticides, etc. for
agriculture purposes has proved to be harmful for animals, birds and human
beings.
The situation is turning serious for every passing day and there is an
urgent need to control the emission of pollutants to the atmosphere.
[Topic 10.1 Composition Of Atmosphere]
Earth is covered with a blanket of air called the “atmosphere” which is
made up of several layers of gases.
Air is essential for life on Earth, for animals to
breathe and for plants to make their food.
It contains more nitrogen than any
other gas.
The components of the atmosphere may be divided into major and minor
constituents.
The amount of these different gases in the air varies slightly from
place to place, season to season and day to night.
The percentages of these
constituents by volume are given in Table (10.1).
Table (10.1): Major and Minor Constituents of the Atmosphere
Major
Percentage
Minor
Percentage
Nitrogen
78.0
Carbon dioxide
0.04
Oxygen
21.0
Noble gases
About 1.0
Argon
0.934
Water Vapours_
[Variable Depending
Constituent
Constituent
upon the humidity
1.
Atwhich time of the day and night you expect humidity to be maximum?
Whichgas is released when carbonated drinks open?
Environmental science helps us to understand the complex interactions that occur in
our ecosystems and the impacts on human life.
[Topic 10.2 Air Pollutants]
Any substance (solid, liquid or gas) in the air which has adverse effect on
human health and quality of life is called an air pollutant.
The concentration of a pollutant is expressed in parts per million (ppm).
A
concentration of one ppm means one part of pollutant per million part of solid,
liquid or gas mixture in which the pollutant is formed.
Every Individual should try to.....
Pour liquid waste into sewers not in open drains, river and sea.
Stop using
environmentally hazardous substances.
Major Air Pollutants
Air is not always clean as it should be.
There are seven types of harmful
substances which account for more than 90% of air pollution.
These are fast
growing sources of air pollution created by our day-to-day activities.
The detail
of these substances is mentioned below.
(i)
Carbon dioxide
(CO,)
(ii)
Carbon monoxide
(CO)
(iii)
Oxides of nitrogen
(NO, NO.) collectively referred to as NO,
(iv)
Oxides of sulphur
(SO,, SO.) collectively referred to as SO,
(v)
Hydrocarbons
(Methane, ethane, etc.)
(vi)
Particulates
(Dust, pollens, metallic compounds)
(vii)
Ozone
(O))
Sources of Air Pollutants
Millions of tonnes of pollutants are emitted into the atmosphere each
year as a result of human activities.
The major activity among them is the
complete and incomplete combustion of fossil fuels which alone is responsible
for most of our pollution problem.
Burning of fossil fuels (oil natural gas, coal) produce carbondioxide,
carbon monoxide, NO,, SO,, CH, ash, smoke and suspended particles.
Many of these pollutants are also released into the air by natural
processes e.g., volcanic eruption releases large quantities of CO,, SO, and
particulates.
Methane is released in the air by the decomposition of vegetation.
It
is also present in waste gases produced during digestion in animals.
Rapid growth of population, urbanization, industrialization and
transportation are the main factors which are responsible for environmental
pollution.
All these factors are increasing in every city of the world especially in
the last half century.
These pollutants are affecting the environment very badly.
Another pollutant ozone (O,) is formed when heat and sunlight cause
chemical reaction between oxides of nitrogen (NO,) and volatile organic
compounds (hydrocarbons).
In winter the smoke present in the atmosphere is mixed with fog to form
what is called smog.
Many cities of Pakistan are completely covered with the
blanket of smog.
Its suspension is caused by a combination of factors which
include industrial pollution, vehicle emission and crop burning.
These factors are
responsible for the accumulation of nitrogen oxides, sulphur dioxide, particulate
matter and volatile organic compounds in air.
The following Table (10.2) shows the major air pollutants and their
harmful effects on human beings and on the environment.
Table (10.2)
Pollutants and Their Harmful Effects
No.
Pollutants
Harmful Effects
Carbon
Higher levels of carbon dioxide lead to
dioxide
increased global warming which can cause ice
(CO>2)
caps to melt and oceans to warm, causing sea
levels to rise.
Extreme weather changes such as
heat waves, heavy rains and wild fires also occur.
Carbon
It is extremely poisonous gas that can cause
monoxide
suffocation and death.
Carbon monoxide is
(CO)
very toxic gas that stops the red blood cells in
animal's blood from carrying oxygen that body
needs.
Oxides of
nitrogen (NO,)
NO, NO,
NO, can damage lungs, irritate the eyes and
damage vegetation.
It can also cause acid rain which affects
buildings and statues made of limestone.
Oxides of
sulphur (SO,)
SO, irritates the eyes and causes breathing
difficulties and acid rain.
SO,, SO,
Hydrocarbons
They can cause pneumonia, coughing, many
other breathing and lung diseases.
They also
cause global warming.
Particulate matter
Irritates the eyes and can also cause severe
breathing problems for people with asthma.
It
also makes clothes dirty.
Also, visibility is
reduced because it produces haze in the air.
Ozone
Breathing ozone can cause a variety of health
problems including chest pain, coughing,
throat irritation and congestion.
Apart from the effects of these pollutants, the smog present in the
atmosphere can lead to health complications like allergies, asthma and lung
infections.
It also inhibits the growth of plants by reducing the amount of carbon
dioxide absorbed during photosynthesis.
“Amazing Facts about the Environment
1. 78% of marine mammals are at risk of choking with plastic.
2.
Humans can use only 1%of all available water.
3.
The world has over 3.04 trillion trees. 27000 out of them are cut down daily to
make toilet paper.
A
How does air pollution affect plants?
[Topic 10.3 Acid Rain]
When rain water has pH between 4.2 and 4.4, it is known as acid rain.
In 1852, Robert Angus Smith was the first to show the relationship between acid
rain and atmospheric pollution in Manchester, England.
He is sometimes
referred to as the “Father of Acid Rain”.
Burning of fossil fuels releases harmful
gases into the atmosphere.
These gases (SO2, SO3) are produced due to the
presence of sulphur in the fossil fuels.
SO2 is converted to SO; in the presence of
oxides of nitrogen of the atmosphere.
Oxides of nitrogen are produced mostly
by the direct combination of atmospheric oxygen and nitrogen in the industrial
and
domestic
ies
combustion processes.
They are also produced
by the combination of
atmospheric nitrogen
and
oxygen
in the
presence of lightning.
ee)
Significant amount of (20) 1)
nitrogen oxides is
produced
by
a
the
reactions taking place
in automobile engines
Fig.(10.1).
: Acid rain usally falls far from the site where the
acidic oxides are generated.
Or6
250%)
One
> SOi6
Oxides of nitrogen
250s.
SO,
HO,
HSOxe9
One)
2NO,,
2NO,
Ove
2NO,
2NO,,,
H,O,
HNO, +
HNO,
These gases mix with the moisture that is always present in the air to form
acid droplets.
Wind can carry these acidic droplets to huge distance.
Finally, these droplets return to the ground as acid rain, acid hail, snow
and even fog.
Acid rain looks, feels and tastes like clean rain.
Its corrosive nature
causes widespread damage to the environment.
vil
Interesting Information! \
There is a giant floating patch of garbage spread over in the Pacific Ocean.
It contains
about 100 million tons of garbage.
Effects of Acid Rain
Acid rain causes anumber ofadverse effects.
It tends to increase acidity of
the soil, threatens humans and aquatic animals, destroys forests, and reduces
agricultural productivity.
Besides, it can corrode buildings, monuments, statues,
bridges and railings.
Most important adverse effects of acid rain are as follows:
(i)
Soil
Acid rain makes soil more acidic.
It dissolves and washes away nutrients
present in the soil which are needed by plants.
It can also dissolve toxic
substances such as aluminium and mercury which are naturally present in the
soil.
(ii) Plants
Acid rain can damage vegetation and plants.
Many plants cannot live or
grow in acidic soil.
Tree roots hold the soil together on hills and mountain areas.
If
the trees are destroyed then the soil is washed away and new plants cannot grow
there.
(iii) Aquatic Life
Acid rain falls into drains, streams, lakes, marshes, rivers and damages the
aquatic life.
Acid rain can make water too acidic for animals to live in.
Due to this,
many lakes and rivers no longer have fish.
(iv) Human Health
The acidification of surface water does not affect life directly.
However,
toxic substances leached from the soil can pollute land water supplies and
damage human health.
(v)
Agriculture
Crops are less affected by the acid rain than forests.
Farmers can prevent
acid rain damage by monitoring the conditions of the soil and when necessary
adding crushed lime (CaO) to neutralize the acid.
(vi) Human-made Structure
Acid rain and the dry deposition of acidic particles damage buildings,
statues, automobiles, and other structures made of stone, metal etc.
Historical
buildings like Parthenon in Athens (Greece) and the Taj Mahal in Agra (India) are
deteriorating due to acid rain.
Which acids are made when SO, and NO, dissolve in rain?
2.
What happens to the soil if trees are destroyed by acid rain?
[Topic 10.4 Global Warming (Greenhouse Effect)]
The progressive warming up of the Earth's surface due to blanketing
effect of man-made carbon dioxide, methane, water vapours and other gases in
the atmosphere is called Greenhouse Effect.
The sun emits short
wave radiation that passes
through greenhouse gases
to heat the surface of the
Earth.
At night, the hot
Earth's
surface emits
longwave radiation that is
mostly absorbed by green
house gases.
This process
of absorption prevents the
radiation to reach space,
reducing the speed at
which the Earth can cool
Fig 10.3: Global warming/greenhouse effect
off (Fig 10.2).
This increases
the temperature of the Earth and causes global warming.
Higher the concentration of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases,
greater will be the absorption of thermal radiation and greater will be the
increase in global warming.
) vo you Know?
Greenhouse effect, depletion of ozone and acid rain are the global effects pollution.
Sources of Greenhouse Gases
Due to the buming of the Sunlight passes TheEarth
warms up and
large amount of coal, oil and/iprou gh the gjves out heat.
Some
natural gas, the amount of green | greenhouse gases
heat passes through
house
the greenhouse gases
gases,
carbon
dioxide | andwarmseverything
together with other gases in the | onthe Earth
atmosphere has increased for the
last 300 years.
but some is trapped
ne warming up the
About half of this
carbon dioxide is utilized by plant
life during
photosynthesis.
As
human beings cut down forests, the
capacity of the trees to remove CO,
from the air
is diminished.
Methane is another green
house gas which causes adverse
effects.
The
increase
in
its
concentration in air is due to the
increased decay of vegetation
matter, digestion in animals and
increased farming
of therice
fields.
Fig
ig (10.3): (10-9) Greenhouse
mee gases
Water vapours are Earth's most abundant greenhouse gas.
It is responsible
for about half of Earth's greenhouse effect.
The remaining carbon dioxide which is not utilized in photosynthesis
goes on accumulating in the lower areas of the atmosphere and forms a thick
dense layer.
This layer behaves like glass sheet of greenhouse that allows the
incoming solar radiation but does not allow it to escape outside; as a result ofthis
the average temperature of the Earth rises.
A rise of a few degrees in temperature may seem small, but it can be
enough to cause significant changes in the climate.
At the moment, it is difficult
for scientists to say how big the changes will be and where the worse effects will
occur.
This can damage agriculture and food production as well.
Howdoliving things add and plants remove carbon dioxide from the air?
Whichgas do rice plants produce?
Whichgasis given out by rotting garbage?
The effects of climate change may be physical, ecological, social or
economical.
Following are four adverse effects of the global warming.
Rise in Sea level
aa’
i
Higher temperature will make
the water of the seas and oceans
expand.
Ice melting in the Antarctic
and Greenland will flow into the sea
and it results in higher sea levels.
This
phenomenon will threaten the low-
lying coastal areas of the world suchas _ }i
the Netherlands and Bangladesh .
: Global warming at sea level
Increase in Rainfall
There may be enormous increase in rainfall in a few regions which may
increase the sea level.
This ultimately will cause worldwide floods endangering
survival of living species.“
: Effects of Climate Change
Effects on Agriculture
The changes in the weather will affect
the types of crops grown in different
parts of the world.
Some crops such as |
wheat and rice grow better in higher ga
temperature but other plants such as [S7e« 4
maize and sugar cane do not .
[ea
: Global warming risking the
agriculture drought.
Hot Summer and Winter
In moderate region, the winter
will be shorter and warmer and the
summer will be longer and hotter .
vil
Since 1990, we have lost around 28
: Summer and winter
trillion tonnes of ice.
At presents, its
melting rate is 1.2 trillion tonnes per year.
[Topic 10.5 Strategies to Reduce Environmental Issues]
Huge amount of pollutant gases are thrown out in the atmosphere by
burning fossil fuels.
Automobiles, aeroplanes, industrial machines and coal-fired
electricity generating plants, etc. are mainly responsible for the extremely
polluted air especially in big cities.
Scientists have developed a number of
different ways to control this menace of pollution.
Planting trees is thought to be very helpful in removing the air pollution.
A
well-known process carried out by plants is photosynthesis in which plants clean
the air through absorption of carbon dioxide and releasing oxygen.
This famous
reaction takes place in the presence of sunlight and it is catalysed by chlorophyll,
the green pigments present in leaves.
6CO,,,
6H,O,
Chlorophyll
Sunlight /
C.H,,0,)
The particulate matter present in the atmosphere is also removed by
plants when it deposits on leaves, branches and trunk surfaces.
Catalytic converters are used in the exhaust system of modern-day
automobiles to reduce the emissions from an internal combustion engine.
Due
to non-availability of enough oxygen the carbon fuel in engine does not burn
completely into carbon dioxide and water.
Thus, toxic by-products like CO and
hydrocarbons are produced.
A three-way catalytic converter performed the following three functions
simultaneously.
Itreduces nitrogen oxides into elemental nitrogen and oxygen.
2NO, 6
Nag + XOr
Itoxidizes CO to COz
200% + Or
200.)
Itoxidizes hydrocarbons into CO2 and H2O
CyHagy + 2XOo6)
xCO,,. + 2x H,0,
Similarly, the emission of sulphur dioxide can be decreased either by
using fuels which have significantly less sulphur contents or using flue gas
desulphurization process.
This process can remove sulphur dioxide gas from the
exhaust gases of fossil fuel.
Flue gas is the mixture of waste gases produced when
fossil fuels are burnt in power plants.
The desulphurization process involves the
addition of adsorbents like calcium oxide which can remove upto 95% of the
sulphur dioxide from the flue gas.
To discourage the excessive use of fossil fuels in our daily lives it is
urgently required to use the renewable resources to meet our energy needs.
Renewable resources are those resources that can continue to exist despite
being consumed over
a period of time even as they are used.
These resources include Sun, wind, water, geothermal and biomass.
Solar
energy and wind energy have been proved to be very effective ways of
generating electricity without damaging the environment.
Radon is a natural radioactive gas.
When it builds up indoors to high level,
it increases the rise of lung cancer.
How to avoid harmful effects of air pollution?
Air quality index (AQI) is a rating system that shows how bad is the
atmosphere around you.
An (AQI) value under 50 is considered good in quality.
This means that it is safe for you to spend time outdoors without posing a risk to
your health.
As the (AQI) number increases, so does the risk to health.
An (AQI)
over 300 is considered hazardous.
Children under 18, adults over 65, people with
chronic heart or lung disease and diabetic people are high risk groups.
Outdoor
workers can also be considered at higher risk because of prolonged exposure.
The following steps should be taken when air quality is bad.
Reduce the time you spend outdoors.
Also reduce the intensity of
outdoor activity.
According to experts the chances of being affected by
unhealthy atmosphere increase if a person stays outdoor for longer
periods or involve in more laborious activity outdoor.
If you are forced to go out, then consider wearing a mask.
Unfortunately,
not all the masks provide adequate safety against particulate matter.
Cloth or dust mask may not effectively filter out the finer particles.
However, well fitted N95 masks have better filtration capabilities and may
be safer
to use.
Keep your indoors healthy by keeping the windows and doors closed.
If it
is difficult to maintain clean air in the entire room then create a clean room
by switching onair conditioner or air cleaner.
If you experience such symptoms that worry you, talk
to your doctor.
Install carbon monoxide detector to detect the increased level of carbon
monoxide.
These higher levels of CO may occur due to faulty fuel burning
appliances.
Breathing in polluted air by these high risk groups may affect their lungs,
heart and brain.
Air pollutants can enter their blood stream and can cause
coughing or itching of eyes which may lead to poor quality of life, hospitalization,
cancer or even premature death.
Key Points
Earth is covered with a blanket of air called atmosphere which is made up of several
layers of gases.
Any substance in the air which has an adverse effect on human health, quality of life
and natural functioning of the ecosystem is called a pollutant.
Oxides of carbon, nitrogen and sulphur alongwith methane and particulate matter are
the main pollutants in the air.
Majorsources of pollutants are due to human activities especially the burning of fossil
fuels.
Pollutants have extremely adverse and harmful effects not only on the human beings
but on the whole ecosystem.
Acid rain is formed due to the presence of oxides of nitrogen and sulphur when they
are mixed with the moisture present in the atmosphere.
The progressive warming of Earth's surface due to blanketing effect of CO2, CH, and
other gases present in the atmosphere is called greenhouse effect.
This effect has
increased the temperature of the Earth.
Every effort should be made to reduce the harmful effects of the pollutants.
These
efforts include discouraging the use of fossil fuels, planting trees and using the
renewable sources of energy.
Steps should be taken to avoid the harmful effects of pollution especially on the
people who are at higher risk.
(i)
+ Tick(“) thecorrect answer.
Which gases are responsible for greenhouse effect?
(a)
(ii)
SO,,NO,
(b)
NO,,CO
Indicate the source of sulphur which is responsible for the presence of
oxides of sulphur in the atmosphere.
(iii)
(a)
Decomposition of vegetation
(b)
Waste gases from digestion of animals
(c)
Photochemical
smog
(d)
Combustion offossil fuels
| Concentration of which gas in the atmosphere is decreased by
photosynthesis in plants?
(a)
Oxygen
(b)
Nitrogen
(c)
Carbon dioxide
(d)
Water vapours
(iv)
Which substance remains unaffected in the catalytic converter fixed in the
exhaust of the automobiles?
(v)
(a)
CO,
(b)
(c)
NO
(d)
No,
People of which age groups are most affected bythe air pollution?
(a) Young adults
(b) Middle age people
(c)
Children
(d) Both children and aged people
(vi)
(vii)
(viil)
In which area there is a greater possibility of acid rain?
(a)
Around village
(b)
Around big cities
(c)
Around industrial area
(d)
Around water bodies
Why is smog not felt in summer?
(a)
Because fog is not present in summer
(b)
Because due to heat of the Earth the smoke rises up
(c)
Because in summer smokeand fog cannot mix with each other
(d)
Because less fossil fuels are burnt in summer
Which catalyst is usedvin the catalytic converterfixed in the exhaust
systems of automobiles?
(a) Ni
(ix)
(b) Cu
(c) Pt, Pd and Rh
(d) CaO
Which components are essentialsfor the formation of photochemical
smog?
(a) CO, NO., CO,
(b) NO,, volatile organic compounds, sunlight
(c) CO,, NO,, sunlight
(d) Volatile organic compounds, NO,, CO
(x)
Which gases contribute towards the formation of acid rain?
(a)
Oxides of carbon
(b)
Oxides of sulphur
(c)
Oxides of nitrogen
(d)
Both the oxides of nitrogen and sulfur
Questions for Short Answers
Whatis the main objective of environmental education?
How is particulate matter released in the atmosphere?
Which gas is more poisonous, CO, or CO?
How does acid rain affect forests?
In what way sulphur present in fossil fuels becomes dangerous?
Name any three major sources responsible for the greenhouse effect.
Vii.
How is wind energy useful for us?
Constructed Response Questions
How is the excessive use of insecticides and pesticides harmful for birds?
Percentage of CO, in air is only 0.04%.
Then how does it become harmful for
the ecosystem?
Why only some pollutant gases present in the atmosphere cause green
house effect while others do not?
How can you reduce the emission of CO present in the gases emitted by the
burning of fuel in the automobile engines?
Mention three different ways in which solar energy can be usedful for us.
Descriptive Questions
Describe the harmful effects of the major pollutants present in the air.
Explain greenhouse effect.
How is global warming dangerous for us?
Whatis air quality index?
What information does it convey?
Who are high risk groups and why is pollution more dangerous for them?
Describe three strategies to address environmental issues.
Investigative Questions
Major Pakistani cities experience a very high AQI in winter which renders
them the most polluted cities in the world.
Point out some of the major
causes of high AQI in these cities.
Why does AQI not rise in Pakistan in hot days of summer?
How has climate change affected Pakistan during the last five years?

[Chapter 11]

Student Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter, students will be able to:
Describe the properties of alkanes as being generally unreactive, except in terms of
combustion and substitution by chlorine
State that in a substitution reaction one atom or group of atoms is replaced by
another atom or group of atoms
Describe the substitution reaction of alkanes with chlorine as a photochemical
reaction, and draw the structural or displayed formulae ofthe products.
Describe, using symbol equations, preparation of alkanes from cracking of larger
hydrocarbons, hydrogenation ofalkenes and alkynes, and reduction of alkyl halides
Introduction
All the organic compounds are known to contain carbon as an essential
element.
This fact has led us to define organic chemistry as the chemistry of
carbon compounds.
The ionic compounds like carbonates, cyanides, carbides
and cyanates, etc. and the oxides of carbon are, however, classified as inorganic
compounds.
Apart from carbon, most of the organic compounds contain
hydrogen and oxygen as well.
Organic compounds are famous for their large number and diverse
behaviour.
Several million organic compounds are known to exist naturally or
have been synthesized in the laboratory.
Organic molecules are usually large and
more complex in nature.
They include biomolecules like proteins, enzymes,
carbohydrates, lipids, vitamins and nucleic acids, pharmaceuticals and synthetic
fibres, etc.
The number of compounds formed by the element carbon is far more
than the total number of compounds formed by all the rest of elements put
together.
This is due to some unique properties of carbon.
The element carbon is present at the center of the periodic table and it is
generally not possible for it to gain or lose electrons to form ionic bonds.
Therefore, it forms four covalent bonds.
Because of it small size, these covalent
bonds are short and strong enabling carbon to give strong and stable bond with
itself and with hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen.
The self-linking property of
carbon is called catenation and due to this it forms long, straight and branched
chains and rings.
Carbon atom mostly forms covalent bonds with other carbon, hydrogen,
oxygen, nitrogen and halogens.
Compounds in which carbon forms single bond
with other atoms are called saturated compounds.
These compounds are
generally represented by their structural formulas.
Methane a saturated
compound, is represented by the following structural formula.
H
H—C—H
orits condensed form is CH,
H
A structural formula thus shows the symbols for the atoms present in the
compounds connected by short lines which represent the bonds present in
them.
Other examples of saturated compounds are C,H,, CH,Cl, CH,OH, CH;NH,,
etc.
What do you understand by the term structural formula of an organic
compound?
[Topic 11.1 Hydrocarbons]
The family of hydrocarbons constitutes a very large number of simple
organic compounds containing carbon and hydrogen only.
Most of the fuels
which we use every day, for example, natural gas, LPG (Liquefied Petroleum Gas),
CNG (Compressed Natural Gas), petrol, diesel and kerosene oil, are all simple
hydrocarbons.
These hydrocarbons also serve as a feedstock to prepare more
complex and useful compounds like plastics, medicines, synthetic fibres, paints
and varnishes.
Hydrocarbons are classified into several structural types called, alkanes,
alkenes, alkynes and aromatic hydrocarbons.
Only alkanes are discussed in this
chapter.
Methane is the simplest alkane and it is mainly used as a fuel but it is also
used to make hydrogen gas, carbon black, carbon disulphide, chloroform and
hydrocyanic acid, etc.
[Topic 11.2 Alkanes]
Alkanes are the simplest family of hydrocarbons with only
carbon — carbon and carbon — hydrogen single bond.
Alkanes are also called
saturated hydrocarbons because all the four valencies of carbon in them are fully
utilized either by hydrogen atoms or by other carbon atoms.
For example, in
ethane (CH3;—CH3) both the carbon atoms are fully saturated with single bonds.
Alkanes are represented by a general formula C,H;, ,, (where n is an
integer).
Methane being the simplest hydrocarbon, is also called parent
hydrocarbon.
As a result of the great complexity and large number
Table (11.1)
No. of
of organic compounds, it is not possible to name each
and every compound individually.
The International
Root
Carbon
atoms
Union of Pure & Applied Chemistry has devised a
systematic way of naming organic compounds called
Meth-
IUPAC nomenclature.
Eth-
Prop-
Ittellsus the number of carbon atoms in
But-
the longest continuous chain present in
Pent-
the molecule.
The roots upto ten carbon
Hex-
Hept-
Oct-
Non-
Dec-
According to IUPAC system of nomenclature, the
entire name of an organic compound has three parts:
1.Root:
atoms are shown in Table (11.1).
2.
Suffix: It is added after the root and tells us
about the class of organic compounds.
3.
Prefix: It is indicated before the root and tells
us about the group or groups attached
to the longest chain.
To explain the above system, let us name the following compound.
CH3
(a) Identify
the longest continuous chain present in the compound.
(b) Identify the class of organic compounds.
(c) Identify the substituent or substituents if present.
This organic compound contains four carbon atoms in the longest
continuous chain and it belongs to the family of organic compounds called
Alkanes.
The root is therefore But- and the suffix —ane added to this.
The organic
compound will thus be given the name Butane.
CH;
Longest continuous chain
The name of the only branch methyl- will be added to this name as prefix.
So the name will become:
<< Branch
Methylbutane
To specify where the branch occurs, the longest continuous chain is
numbered starting from the end closest to the branch.
This number is then
attached to this prefix.
The name of the above compound will then be:
CH3
2-Methylbutane or iso-Butane
If butane has no branch it is called normal or n-butane.
CH; — CH, — CH,— CH;
n-Butane
The distinguishing feature of alkanes making them distinct from other compounds is
their lack of reactivity towards usual chemical reagents.
Name the following compounds according to IUPAC system of
nomenclature.
CH;
(i) CH3
—- CH —- CH
CH;
—- CH2——
(ii) CH3s
CHs3
C—— CH2 —— CHs3
CH;
Electron cross and dot structures of Alkanes
i
H
NTE TET ETE Tn
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
mxeMeXL
IxeQexz
coxeMeXL
a
IxeQexZ
coxeMeXL
I—o—=
I—o—-=
H
H
Hx*Ce*Ce*C*e*eCexH
H
H
H
How many methyl and methylene groups are present in each of the
above compounds?
[Topic 11.3 Preparation of Alkanes]
Generally, any member of the alkane series can be prepared by the
following methods.
1.
Cracking of Higher Hyrocarbons
Cracking is the name of a process in which hydrocarbons with higher
molecular masses (which are lesser in demand) are broken up into smaller
hydrocarbons which are more in demand.
This is done by heating the
hydrocarbons at high temperature in the presence of a catalyst.
Fractional distillation of petroleum gives naphtha which consists of a
mixture of liquid hydrocarbons.
It is then heated at around 500 C in the presence
of catalyst called zeolite to give hydrocarbons which have five to ten carbon
atoms.
Naphtha
(Mixture of
Heat
Zeolite
> Alkanes and alkenes containing
5 to 10 carbon atoms
hydrocarbons)
Cracking of hydrocarbons helps balance the availability of petroleum fractions with the
demand for them.
When cracking transforms bigger hydrocarbons into small
hydrocarbons, the fuel supply is increased.
That helps to balance demand with supply.
2.
Reduction of Alkenes and Alkynes
Alkanes can be prepared by reducing alkenes and alkynes with hydrogen
gas in the presence of nickel metal as a catalyst.
Methane cannot be prepared by
this method.
The reaction is also called hydrogenation of alkenes and alkynes
and is an example of addition reaction.
An addition reaction occurs when
hydrogen (H,) is added to an unsaturated compound.
CH,== CH,
CH == CH
+ 2H, _“_, CH; — CHs
Ethene
Ethyne
H, ——— CH; — CH;
200 C
200 C
Ethane
Ethane
Addition of hydrogen to alkenes or alkynes is called reduction reaction.
This reaction is
used to prepare banaspati ghee and margarine.
3.
Reduction of Alkyl Halides
Alkyl halides (R-X) can be reduced to alkanes with hydrogen generated by
reaction of zinc metal with hydrochloric acid.
[Topic 11.4 Important Reactions]
Alkanes are sometimes referred to as paraffins which means “little
affinity”.
This term describes their behaviour, for alkanes show little chemical
affinity for other substances and are chemically inert to most laboratory reagents.
However, alkanes do react with chlorine and oxygen under suitable conditions.
The unreactivity of alkanes may be explained on the basis of the non-polarity of
the bonds present in them.
The electronegativity values of carbon (2.6) and
hydrogen (2.1) do not differ appreciably and the bonding electrons between C -
H and C - C bonds, are almost equally shared.
This fact makes alkanes almost
non-polar.
In view of this, the reagents like acids, bases, oxidizing agents find no
reaction site in alkane molecules to which they could be attached.
1.
Halogenation
Alkanes give substitution reactions.
The reactions which involve the
replacement of hydrogen ofalkanes by an atom or a group of atoms like halogen
are called substitution reactions.
Alkanes react with halogens especially chlorine
to give alkyl halides.
Since these substitution reactions are carried out in the
presence of UV light, these are called photochemical substitution reactions.
The reaction may proceed ahead and all the hydrogen atoms attached
with carbon of the methane are successively replaced by chlorine atoms.
CH;——Cl + Cl —TM
+ cH.cl + HC
Dichloromethane
CHCl + Cl —
CHCI, + HCI
Trichloromethane or
chloroform
CHCl, + Cl
> cCh + HCI
Tetrachloromethane or
carbon tetrachloride
Structural formulae of the products are shown below:
H
CHCl = H— é~c
CH,Cl
Cl
CHCl, — H— 6=
H
H—-C—<
Cl
CCl,
ci- —<
Alkanes burn in oxygen or air to form CO2 and H20 with the evolution of
large amount of heat.
The reaction is called combustion.
Methane
2CH3
— CH3(g)
+ 7O2(g)
————~>
4CO2(g)
+ 6H20(g) +
heat
Ethane
vul
“’ ) Interesting Information! \
A mixture of natural gas (methane) and air may explode when ignited.
This is
the main cause of explosion at homes where gas leakage occurs.
(1)
In the reduction of alkyl halides with Zn / HCl, alkyl halide is being
reduced.
Which species in this reaction is being oxidized?
(2)
During the combustion reaction of ethane, which bonds are being
broken and which are being formed?
(3) What products other than CH;Cl are formed when methane reacts with
chlorine gas?
The compounds obtained from plants and animals were named as organic
compounds.
Organic chemistry is the chemistry of carbon compounds.
The element carbon is
unique in its behaviour.
Organic compounds are covalent in nature.
Their melting points and boiling points
are generally low.
Organic compounds containing carbon and hydrogen are called hydrocarbons.
They
are classified into saturated and unsaturated hydrocarbons.
Hydrocarbons containing a single bond between carbon and carbon and carbon and
hydrogen are called saturated hydrocarbons or alkanes.
Alkanes can be named by a systematic way of nomenclature called IUPAC system of
nomenclature.
Alkanes can be prepared bya number of different methods of preparation.
Although alkanes show least reactivity towards other compounds, they react with
halogens and undergo combustion reactions.
Exercise Wap
Tick (v) the correct answer.
(i)
Which other atom is almost always present along with carbon atom in all
organic compounds?
(ii)
(a)
Oxygen
(b)
Nitrogen
(c)
Hydrogen
(d)
Halogen
Which other metal can be used to reduce alkyl halides?
(a) Al
(iil)
(b) Mg
(c) Ni
(d) Co
If naphtha undergoes a combustion reaction what products do you
expect it to form?
(iv)
(a) Alkanes
(b) Alkenes
(c) CO2 and H2O
(d) Bothalkanes and alkenes
Why does a mixture of zinc and hydrochloric acid acts as a reducing
agent?
(a)
Because zinc acts as a reducing agent.
(b) Because atomic hydrogen is produced with Zn / HCI which acts as a
reducing agent.
(c)
Because molecular hydrogen is produced with Zn / HCl which acts as
a reducing agent.
(d) Because chloride ions are produced with Zn / HCl which act as a
reducing agent.
(v)
Which.alkane will evolve the most amount of heat when it is burnt with
oxygen?
(vi)
(vii)
(a) Ethane
(b)
Propane
(c) n-Butane
(d)
iso-Butane
Which reaction is not given by alkanes?
(a) Substitution
(b)
(c)
(d) Cracking
Addition
Which hydrocarbon is responsible for explosions in coal mines?
a) Butane
(viil)
Combustion
b) Pentane
c) Methane
d) Ethene
Which product will be formed when ethyl bromide (CH3 CHa Br) is treated
with Zn/HCl
(a) CH,
(b) CH3—CH3
(c)
(d) CH3;—CH2—CH3
CH3 —CH2—CH2—CHs3
(ix)
(x)
Which of the following is not a process of halogenation ofalkanes?
(a) Cracking
(b) Chlorination
(c) Bromination
(d) lodination
How many moles of oxygen will be required to completely burn propane?
(a) 4 moles
(b) 5 moles
(c) 3 moles
(d) 6 moles
Questions for Short Answers
Differentiate between an organic and an inorganic compound.
Why are organic compounds found in large numbers?
Name the products which are obtained when natural gas is oxidized under
controlled conditions.
How naphtha fraction is decomposed to give lower hydrocarbons?
Write down the molecular formula, structural formula and the condensed
structural formula for iso-butane.
Vi.
How are organic compounds useful for us?
Vii.
Write down the names of five such organic compounds which exist
naturally?
Vili.
Give IUPAC name to the following compound.
CH; — or — CH2— CH;
CH;
How do the melting and boiling points of alkanes change when we move
from lower members to higher members?
Constructed Response Questions
Why do alkanes show little reactivity towards the other reagents?
Why does a mixture of natural gas and air explode?
How do you compare the melting and boiling points of inorganic and
organic compounds?
Reactions of alkanes with chlorine takes place in the presence of sunlight.
Whatis the role of sunlight in the reaction?
How do you compare the boiling point of n — butane with that of iso —
butane?
Vi.
Why are organic compounds not generally soluble in water?
Descriptive Questions
Describe the importance of organic compounds in daily life.
Why is carbon so important as an element that the whole branch of
chemistry is based on it?
A carbon-carbon single bond (C — C) in alkanes does not behave as a
functional group but a carbon carbon double bond (C = C) in alkenes does.
Explain.
Explain IUPAC system of nomenclature for alkanes.
How combustion reaction ofalkanes is useful for us?
Investigative Questions
When natural gas valve is kept open in the kitchen, the gas spreads through
the whole kitchen.
This may cause an explosion.
What is the reason of this
explosion and how can you avoid it?
“Neem” is a common tree grown throughout our country.
Comment on the
medicinal benefits of this tree.
Namea few popular medicines which are, in fact, organic compounds?

[Chapter 12]

Student Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter, students will be able to:
Explain that units are standardized for better communication and collaboration.
(Some examples may include: In the field of chemistry, the International System of
Units (SI) is used to measure physical quantities such as mass, volume, and
temperature.
This standardized system ensures that chemists worldwide can use the
same units to measure and communicate their results, facilitating communication
and collaboration in the field.
Without standardized units, it would be difficult for
chemists to compare their results with one another, and it would be challenging to
develop consistent and accurate scientific models.
For example, imagine if one
chemist measured the mass of a substance in grams while another used ounces.
The
two measurements would be difficult to compare and combine, potentially leading to
inaccurate or inconsistent results.)
Identify SI units for abstract and physical quantities (some examples include mass,
time and amount of matter
Apply the concept that units can be combined with terms for magnitude, especially
kilo, deci, and milli.
« — Justify why chemists use cm?, g and s as more practical units when working with small
amounts in lab.
Explain with examples how different tools and techniques can be used to manage
accuracy and precision for inherent errors that arise during measurement.
Science is a systematic study of this world through observation and
experimentation.
It is a method through which we make sense of this world in
which we live.
Scientific research is done in all the countries of the world.
But the way it is
done is not identical everywhere.
In order to make sure things are done properly
and carefully, we need to share ideas and standardize our approach towards
solving the problems.
One of the most usual problem which is faced by the scientific community
is the issue of units.
If scientists in one country are measuring lengths in metres
and in another country in feet, then we will have to face problems in converting
them.
Comparing quantities in different units is not only confusing but the
wastage of time as well.
For the reasons mentioned above scientists have agreed to adopt
standard and user-friendly units called SI or System International Units.
Things
become alot easier when we use these units.
The adoption of SI units is important in all branches of science because it
makes communication easy worldwide.
It allows scientists to share data easily.
SI units are preferred because they reduce the number of conversions
needed to coordinate information among the scientists.
SI units use base 10, just like our number system.
So, it is much easier to
learn, remember and convert these units.
These units are based on definite and
precise standards.
SI units are interrelated in such a way that one unit is derived
from other units without conversion factors.
International System of Units (SI System)
P wn
The following systems of units are commonly used in the world:
Centimetre-gram-second System of Units (CGS System)
Metre-kilogram-second System of Units (MKS System)
Imperial System of Units
SI units are used almost everywhere in the world.
It allows scientists to use
a single standard in exchanging scientific data.
This fact brings accuracy,
consistency and universal understanding in scientific communication.
A
measurement taken in one part of the world can be easily understood and
verified in another part without any confusion.
When scientists belonging to different countries and cultures collaborate
on research, they need a common language to share their results.
Using SI units
enables scientists to compare results, replicate experiments and take benefit of
each other work.
In conclusion we can say that SI units allow scientists to work together
effectively, advancing the frontiers of our knowledge.
All of this ensures safety,
reliability, reproducibility and progress.
|Exercise|
1.
Whatis the difference between reliable and reproducible results?
2.
How SI units have brought harmony in the scientific community?
[Topic 12.1 SI Units in Chemistry]
There are seven base units in SI system for physical quantities out of which
we use five in Chemistry.
These physical quantities are length, time, amount of
substance, mass and temperature.
It is the standard unit of length.
Symbol m is used for metre.
Metre is the
distance travelled by light in vacuum in about 300 millionth ofa second.
Fig 12.1: Metre rod
12.1.2 Kilogram
Its symbol is kg and it is the standard unit of mass.
A block is kept in France
which is taken as a standard unit of mass.
It is also defined as the mass of 1000
cm of water.
Fig 12.2: Different masses
It is the standard unit of time with a symbol s.
It is the time that elapses
during 9,192,631,770 cycles of the radiation produced by the transition between
two levels of the cesium-133 atom.
Symbols are not changed in plural forms.
For example, 100 millimetres is written as
100 mm and notas 100 mms.
It is represented by K and it is the standard unit of temperature.
It is Lee of
the thermodynamic temperature of the triple point of water.
It is a point at which
all the states of water exist at the same time.
12.1.5 Mole
It is the base unit of the amount of pure substance and it is denoted by
mol.
It is defined as having exactly 6.022 x 10” particles ofa substance.
Table (12.1).
Base Units of SI system
Quantity
Unit
Length
metre (m)
Time
second (s)
Amount of substance
mole (mol)
Mass
kilogram (kg)
Temperature
kelvin (K)
Derived Units
Apart from these base units, there are other quantities that are
mathematically derived from these base units.
Examples of the derived units
used in chemistry are given in the following Table (12.2).
Table (12.2) Derived Units
Quantity
Unit
Volume
cubic metre (m?)
Density
kg per cubic metre (kgm’*)
Area
square metre (m?)
In addition to derived units, there are other specific quantities commonly used in
chemistry Table (12.3).
Table (12.3) Specific Quantities used in chemistry
Quantity
Unit
Force
newton/N (kgm*)
Pressure
pascal/Pa (Nm*)
Energy
joule/J (Nm)
Since the SI system of units is a metric system, it is based around the number 10
for convenience.
A set unit of prefixes has been developed which indicates
whether the unit is a multiple or a fraction of the base ten.
It allows the reduction
of zeros of a very small number or a very large number.
These SI prefixes also
have a set of symbols that precede the unit symbol, Table (12.4).
Table (12.4) Prefixes used with SI units
Symbol
Prefix
Mega
10
Kilo
k
10
Hecto
h
10
Deca
10'
Deci
10"
Centi
C
10
Milli
10
Micro
u
10
Nano
n
10
Pico
p
10 ”
In Chemistry, we measure the masses of the reactants in grams.
It is
essential because the unit of measurement of molar mass consists of grams per
mole.
Therefore, given a mass measured in grams as well as a corresponding
molar mass, enables us to find the mole of a substance.
Moreover, in Chemistry
the quantities involved in the laboratory are likely to be small.
The choice of gram
rather than kg is therefore sensible and normal.
Using grams provides more
manageable numbers for calculation and prevents the need for excessively large
or small values.
Similarly, Celsius scale is most often used to measure temperature in
Chemistry rather than Kelvin because it is more convenient to use it.
Celsius scale
has 100 divisions in total which makes it more compatible with the base ten
format of SI system.
Another reason is that it is easier to convert temperature on
Celsius scale into Kelvin scale.
The following equation is used for this conversion.
K= C +273
The unit of measurement of volume in Chemistry is cubic centimetre (cm?)
instead of cubic metre (m?) because it is easy to measure and calculate with it and
itis precise.
In laboratory, we usually measure smaller volumes of liquid which are
more manageable in cubic centimetre rather than cubic metre.
[Topic 12.2 Tools and Techniques to Manage Accuracy and Precision]
Measurement is the foundation for all experiments in science.
Every
measurement carries a level of uncertainty which is known as error.
An error may
be defined as the difference between the measured value and the actual value.
For example, if two students use the same tool or instrument for measurement, it
is not necessary that both of them get similar results.
The difference between the
measurements is called an error.
An error may occur due to two factors: the
limitation of the measuring instrument and the skill of the student making the
measurement.
When we use tools meant for measurement, we assume that they give
correct results.
However, these tools may not always be right.
In fact, they have
errors that naturally occur and these errors are called systematic errors.
Systematic errors may be removed by adding or subtracting a constant
adjustment given to each measurement.
Systematic error affect the accuracy of
the measurement.
All measuring instruments contribute to systematic error e.g.
pipette, burette and measuring cylinder may deliver the volume slightly different
from the one indicated bytheir graduation.
Another type of error which a student commits during measurement is
called a random error.
Random error causes one measurement to differ slightly
from the next measurement.
It comes from unpredictable changes during an
experiment.
The main reasons for random errors are limitations of instruments,
environmental factors and slight variation in procedure.
For example, when
taking a volume reading from a measuring cylinder, you may read the volume
from a different angle each time.
Measuring the mass of a sample on a balance
may give you different values as the surrounding air affects the balance.
A
random error often determines the precision of the experiment.
The goal of any
experiment is to obtain accurate and precise results.
[Topic 12.3 Accuracy and Precision]
Accuracy and precision are both ways to measure the correctness of
results.
They are used interchangeably in everyday life.
Accuracy measures how close results are to the true or known value.
For
example, the volume of a liquid is 26 cm³.
A student measures its volume three
times and finds the result as 27 cm³.
The student is not accurate because he has not
calculated the exact result.
The closeness of two or more measurements to each other is called
precision.
For example, if you weigh a given substance five times and every time
you get 3.2kg reading, then your measurement is precise but not necessarily
accurate.
Precision is independent of accuracy.
A student may be accurate but not
precise and vice versa.
The exact mass of an object is 20 g.
Astudent measures it and takes three
readings as 17.3, 17.4 and 17.2.
The student is considered as precise but not
accurate.
Similarly, another student measures the mass of the same object and
gets readings as 19.8, 20.5 and 19.6.
The second student is the more accurate but
not precise.
1.
A student weighs a given substance three times, and each time he gets
the reading 5.2g.
The true weight of the substance is, however, 5.0g.
Is the
work done by the student (i) precise and accurate (ii) accurate but not
precise (iii) precise but not accurate?
2.
Howwill you avoid systematic and random errors?
Key Points
"Exercise Map
Tick (“) the correct answer.
(i)
Which of the following pairs of quantities may be measured in the same
unit?
(it)
(a) Heat and temperature
(b) Temperature and area
(c) Heat and work
(d) Length and work
In which unit we usually measure the energy present in the food?
(a) Kilojoules
(b Megajoules
(c) Calorie
(d) Joule
(iii) What prefix is used for 10 ”?
(a) Mega
(b) Pico
(c) Giga
(d) Tessa
(iv) In Sl unit of pressure is expressed in:
(v)
(a) Newton per metre
(b) Newton per metre square
(c) Joule
(d) Pascal
Whichsymbol is used for kilogram in SI units?
(a) K
(b) k
(c) Kgm
(d) kg
(vi) What does a mole represent?
(a) Number
(b) Mass
(c) Volume
(d) Length
(vii) Which unit of volume should usually be used in Chemistry?
(a) Millilitre
(b) Litre
(c) Cubic centimetre
(d) Cubic metre
(viii) Express 0.000840 in scientific notation:
(a) 8.40x 10
(c) 8.40x 10
(b) 840 x 10
(d) 84.0 x 10
(ix) In Sl units prefix nano means:
(x)
(a) 10
(b) 10
(c) 10"
65 Cis equivalent to:
(d) 10 ”
(a) 208K
(b) 338K
(c) 403 K
(d) 300K
Questions for Short Answers
i.
Whatis consistency of results?
li.
Why Sl units are user friendly?
iii.
Define systematic error and random error.
iv.
Whatis reason behind a random error?
v.
Does systematic error affect the accuracy?
vi.
Which other systems of measurements are used apart from SI units?
vii.
Define metre.
vill.
Mention two benefits scientists get by using SI units.
Constructed Response Questions
i.
Compare the units in SI system with those in MKS system?
ii.
Whatare five basic SI units which are used in Chemistry?
ili.
Explain the three units derived for the basic SI units.
iv.
Explain why do we prefer to use smaller units of mass and volume in
Chemistry?
v.
What difficulties we expect to encounter if we use different units of
measurement in daily life.
Descriptive Questions
i.
What are our indigenous units of measurement of mass, volume and length?
ii.
Elaborate the difference between precision and accuracy.
ili.
Howcan you avoid systematic errors in your measurements?
iv.
Howdo taking measurements in SI units ensure safety and reliability?
v.
Canastudent be both inaccurate and imprecise in his measurements?
Investigative Question
i.
Elaborate the importance of using SI units in space exploration.
Chapter 13
Danger | Danger
Highly flenma
[RADIATION
Risk of asphyxiation
HAZARD
TOXIC | Warning
HAZA
ARM
“srrosive
Laboratony,and'Pr
Practical:Skills:

[Chapter 13]

Student Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter, students will be able to:
Explain, with examples, the types of chemical hazards in the lab and suggest safety
precautions. (Types of chemical hazards to be identified: flammable or explosive
hazards, corrosive hazards, toxic hazards, reactive hazards, radiation hazards and
asphyxiation hazards)
Recognize the meaning of different chemical hazard signs in the lab and on
chemicals.
Recognize the importance of personal protective equipment (PPE) by correctly
identifying the types of PPE needed for different lab. activities.
Locate the nearest fire extinguisher and emergency shower.
| Show awareness of emergency procedures in the event of an emergency in the lab.
introduction
A chemistry laboratory is a place where a student is trained to observe the
physical and chemical characteristics of substances by following definite
procedures.
Before starting the laboratory work, a student should get himself
familiarized with the layout of the laboratory and various fittings provided in the
laboratory table as well as the side shelves.
Students are expected to conduct
themselves in a responsible manner at all times in the lab.
They are advised not to
work alone in the lab.
Experiments should be performed in the presence of lab.
instructor and other laboratory staff.
All equipments should be checked before
use whether they are working properly according to the requirements of the
experiments.
Determine the potential hazards related to any equipment or the
experiment before beginning any work.
Appropriate safety precautions must be
observed at all cost.
There must not be any crowding in the lab and students
should stick to their work places at a safe distance from each other.
Don't bring
any food items in the lab.
Never taste or smell any compound or a gas.
If it is
necessary
to smell a gas it is always advised to waft the fumes or vapours towards
your nose.
Warning signs are displayed when unusual hazards, hazardous materials,
hazardous equipment or special conditions are expected.
Do not pour chemicals
down the drains and do not utilize the sewer for chemical waste disposal.
Keep
all sink traps and floor drains clean.
Laboratory chemical waste can be disposed
off in sewer or trash bin if they are non-hazardous materials.
Acids and bases are
first neutralized followed by sewer disposal.
Hazardous waste material is
transported to hazardous waste disposal site.
Misuse and mishandling of chemicals may create serious problems for the
laboratory workers.
A laboratory worker must use the chemicals according to the
standard procedures keeping in view the particular hazards and precautions
required for the safe use.
The chemicals which can create problems for the safety
of workers are cleaning agents, disinfectants, solvents, paints, compressed gas
cylinders, mineral acids, carcinogenic chemicals etc.
Recognizing hazards which are commonly encountered in the laboratory
helps to identify and minimize many of the health and safety problems.
Most
hazards which we might face while working in the laboratory fall into the
following categories.
[Topic 13.1 Chemical Hazards in the Laboratory]
13.1.1 Flammable and Explosive Chemical Hazards
To start working in the laboratory requires great care, responsible
behaviour and good attention.
It is important to exercise extreme caution while
working with delicate instruments, hazardous chemicals and open flames.
If
flammable and explosive chemicals are not handled in a safe and compliant
manner, they can cause acute health problems.
These problems may include
burns, eye injuries, lung disease and suffocation.
Chemicals that cause a sudden release of pressure, gas and heat when
they experience sudden shock are called explosive chemicals.
Examples of
chemicals which are expected to explode are picric acid, 2,4 -di-nitropheny!|
hydrazine, benzoyl peroxide, nitrocellulose etc.
Flammable chemicals or mixtures are those which have a flashpoint
around room temperature.
Examples of flammable compounds are ethers,
methylated spirit, benzene, acetone, petrol etc.
Ifyou ever come across any chemical that you suspect to explode, do not
attempt to move the container to avoid shock.
Explosives can cause damage to
people, windows, tables etc.
Avoid using a chemical that is hazardous.
Look for its alternative.
If you
must use a potentially dangerous chemical, you must follow the underlying
a WOONOUKRWN
safety instructions.
Obtain prior approval from your teacher.
Always use smallest quantity of the chemicals.
Always conduct experiment in fume hood.
Remove all other chemicals and apparatus around you.
Inform other people working with you.
Always wear safety spectacles, gloves and lab. coat.
Always keep flammable compounds away from heat source.
Pour the flammable liquid very carefully.
Properly dispose off any hazardous waste.
Donotstore flammable liquid in refrigerator.
13.1.2 Corrosive Hazards
Corrosive chemicals attack living tissues when they come in contact with
them.
They can be in the form of solids, liquids or gases.
Such chemicals attack
skin, eyes and respiratory tract and in the intestine as well.
Whenever you work
with corrosive chemicals, wear splash goggles instead of safety glasses and use a
face shield.
Safety Precautions
Corrosive chemicals must be used in a fume cupboard to avoid breathing
corrosive vapours.
While mixing concentrated acids with water, always add acid slowly to
water and not vice versa.
Ensure eye wash and emergency shower is available.
Wash the affected area with soap and water and seek medical attention in
case of emergency.
Examples of corrosive chemicals are mineral acids including HF, caustic alkalies,
acetic acid (glacial) etc.
13.1.3.
Toxic Chemical Hazards
A toxic chemical is a poisonous material which is capable of causing
serious health problems.
Mercury, benzene, chlorine, pesticides, ammonia,
hydrogen cyanide are some examples of toxic chemicals.
The following safety
instructions may be ensured in case you intend to work with toxic chemicals.
FWNS>
Wear gloves, masks or other protective devices.
Au
Wash your hands with soap and water after you finished.
Keep the work area well ventilated.
Keep the toxic chemicals in original container.
Do not work alone.
Always work in fume hood because toxic vapours can be formed during
an experiment.
Seek immediate medical aid if you think you may have exposed to
poisonous substance.
13.1.4.
Reactive Chemical Hazards
The reactivity of chemicals is vital for the production of many other
chemicals, pharmaceuticals and food products which are in our daily use.
When
chemical reactions are not properly performed, they may cause fires, explosions
as they may evolve dangerous gases.
These reactions may result to an extreme
damage to life and property.
Examples of reactive chemicals are calcium hydride,
Na, Li, azides, picric acid, AICI,, benzoyl peroxide etc.
Safety Instructions
Handle reactive chemicals with utmost care.
Segregate these from other
chemicals while storage.
Appropriate measures should be taken before performing reactions with
reactive chemicals.
Utilize shield and heavy gloves.
Minimize the quantity required for experiment.
Glass equipment must be shielded by wrapping with tape.
After use carefully dispose off every dangerous material.
13.1.5.
Radiation Hazards
When a person is exposed to a high dose of radiation, it can damage the
functioning of tissues and organs and can cause vomiting, radiation burns, hair
loss and radiation syndrome.
Radioactive materials that emit alpha and beta particles inflict extreme
damage when inhaled or injected.
Gamma rays cause external injuries.
Medical
x-rays produce ionizing radiation which can affect living tissues.
Safety Instructions
Keep radioactive sources shielded.
Avoid prolonged exposures to the radiation.
Stay inside as walls and ceilings can protect you from radiation fall out.
Never operate equipment that produces radiation without sufficient
training.
Wear protective clothing, wear face mask.
Avoid contact of the material with bare skin.
Monitor exposure to radiation using badges etc.
13.1.6 Asphyxiation Hazards
It is a type of hazard in which a gas or vapours can cause unconscience or
death through suffocation.
A sufficient level of oxygen is essential for normal breathing.
If this level
falls, it can create very dangerous situation.
The exposed person has no warning
and cannot realize that oxygen level has become low.
If the level of oxygen
decreases a person can feel rapid breathing, rapid heart rate, nausea and
convulsions.
Examples of chemical asphyxiants are hydrogen cyanide, carbon
monoxide, nitrogen, argon, helium, methane and carbon dioxide etc.
Safety Instructions
Store and use asphyxiant chemicals in well-ventilated areas with plenty of
air.
Weara full lab. coat, wear glasses and standard gloves, long trousers and
closed-toed shoes.
Dispose off the waste strictly according to the instructions.
If exposed to such chemicals wash the exposed part with running water
and seek medical attention.
When such a chemical is inhaled, remove the patient from the
PWN
contaminated area and call appropriately trained person.
Why flammable liquids are not stored in refrigerator?
Can you wear contact lenses in the lab.?
Under which circumstances explosive chemicals are likely to explode?
How will you dispose off acid and alkali waste after the experiment is
finished?
[Topic 13.2 Hazard Signs]
A chemistry laboratory is a strict area where rigorous rules must be
practised to avoid a chance of a deadly accident.
A dangerous situation may arise
not only for the individuals working there but for the whole area.
In a laboratory
there are several hazardous materials, sensitive equipments and specified areas
for specific tasks.
Proper warning signs ought to be posted on these areas to
ensure that every person entering there must understand and act accordingly to
maintain laboratory safety.
Several signs and symbols are posted in different areas of the lab. and
bottles containing hazardous chemicals.
These signs indicate that specific
precautions must be observed according to the requirement of the sign posted
there.
If you see such signs, you must be alert and take extra care to maintain
safety in that area, .
Danger | Danger |RADIATION| TOXIC | Warning
Corrosive
Highly Ath Risk edict
WARNING
Lab coats
must be worn
in this area
HAZARD HAZARD)
SANITIZE
HANDS
Wear
No admittance
WARNING
EXPLOSIVE,
only | Ne
face mask [fl personne!
: Different Hazard Signs
What does warning sign “caution” convey the message?
Name some explosive chemicals.
CAUTION
[Topic 13.3 Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)]
in the Laboratory
Personal protective equipment should be made available to students to
face any emergency situation which may arise in the lab.
They are also useful to
reduce exposures to hazardous chemicals.
Proper protective equipment include
such items as lab coat, protective glasses, face shields, apron, boots and hearing
protection.
[Topic 13.4 Location of Fire Extinguisher]
Chemical laboratories using such materials which are likely to catch fire
during experiments must have a portable fire extinguisher.
This equipment can
quickly be used to control a small fire if it is applied by a student individually.
For
this purpose all students should be well aware of the location where this fire
extinguisher is placed.
A training session should be held to train all the students
to know how to handle and apply this fire extinguisher to extinguish the fire
properly without any panic or harm to anybody.
Similarly the facility of a shower should also be made available in the lab
whose location and working must be told to everybody working in the lab.
In
case of fire or any other emergency students should know how to face that
emergency situation.
Should emergency drills be compulsory or optional?
[Topic 13.5 Emergency Situation in the Lab]
Students should make themselves aware of the actions that need to be
taken in case of an emergency in a laboratory or if a person is affected.
For this
purpose periodic drills should be held with compulsory participation.
Students
should not only been given lectures but involve them practically to handle the
emergency situations.
During drill firefighting and other equipments must be
checked whether they are in proper working order or not.
The following points should be kept in mind to cope with the emergency
situation.
Stay calm and do not panic.
Alert people in the area to evacuate.
In case of fire, close doors to confine fire.
Use fire extinguisher to put
In case of chemical emergency adopt safety procedures as mentioned in
down the fire.
article 13.1.
Call and assist emergency staff.
Working in the laboratory requires care and responsible behaviour.
Hazardous
chemicals and open flames if not handled properly can cause health problems.
Chemicals can suddenly explode due to shock and heat.
They require handling them
with care.
Safety instructions should be followed strictly to avoid any damage due to flammable
and explosive chemicals.
Corrosive chemicals affect skin, eyes and respiratory tract.
To avoid such health
problems corrosive chemicals must be handled in fume cupboard.
Chemicals are poisonous and cause great harm if not handled according to
instructions.
Somechemicals areso reactive that they require special care in the laboratory.
Radioactive materials can affect living tissues and organs and cause other health
problems.
It is important to avoid longer exposure to radiation to stay healthy.
Asphyxiant chemicals are extremely lethal because they can cause suffocation.
They
must be used in well-ventilated places with protected dress.
Signs and symbols should be posted in the lab. and chemical bottles to let the people
know their hazardous nature
10.
Personal protection equipment are mandatory before you enter the lab.
11.
Students shall know the location and operation of fire extinguisher and shower in the
lab.
Exercise Wap
Tick (v’) the correct answer.
(i)
(ii)
(iil)
(iv)
Safety in the chemistry laboratory is:
(a)
the responsibility of the students only
(b)
the responsibility of the professor only
(c)
theresponsibility of the lab. incharge only
(d)
a shared responsibility
Accidents often result from:
(a)
making mistakes
(b)
failure to use common sense
(c)
failure to follow instructions
(d)
all of the above
The label “Warning” on a chemical bottle signifies:
(a)
that the chemical can cause less serious injury
(b)
that the chemical can cause serious injury
(c)
thatuser should be careful when using chemical
(d)
that usershould open it only in the presence of a teacher
The label “Corrosive” on a chemical bottle indicates:
(a)
(b)
(v)
(vi)
thatthe material is an oxidizing agent
— thatthe material can degrade rapidly upon exposure
(c)
that its contact destroys living tissue
(d)
that the chemical can explode
Example of highly toxic chemical:
(a)
Ethanol
(b)
Acetic acid
(c)
Potassium cyanide
(d)
Potassium permanganate
Example of self-reactive chemical:
(a)
Potassium
(b)
Phenol
(c)
Picric acid
(d)
n-Hexane
(vii)
(viii)
When diluting an acid with water:
(a)
doit quickly
(b)
do not stir the container
(c)
always add acid to water
(d)
always add water to acid
What should you do in case of a fire drill in the lab.?
(a)
run to safety shower
(b)
climb into the fume cupboard
(c)
close gas valves and turn off all equipments
(d)
carry chemicals out ofthe lab.
Questions for Short Answers
Name some corrosive chemicals.
What type of safety precautions are adopted to avoid damage due to
explosive chemicals?
What type of damages can reactive chemicals cause?
Indicate two such safety instructions which are required to avoid
radiation.
Which chemicals can cause suffocation?
Vi.
Why signs and symbols are posted on lab. and chemical bottles?
Vil.
How fire caused by chemicals should be handled?
Vill.
Why emergency drills are important to face emergency situations?
Constructed Response Questions
How will you handle an emergency situation caused by fire due to short
circuiting?
What type of reactions should be carried out in fume cupboard?
Put forward at least two suggestions to improve safety in the lab.
Can you identify warning symbols posted for radiation and asphyxiant
chemicals?
Why sudden shock can cause some chemicals to explode?
Descriptive Questions
I.
Explain hazards due to explosive and toxic chemicals.
il.
Write down five such common safety instructions which are used to avoid
all types of hazards.
ili.
Explain the importance of warning signs and symbols to avoid any
accident in the lab.
IV.
Name some toxic chemicals.
Describe the effects of soreading toxic gas in
the lab.
V.
A student has spilled over a corrosive and explosive chemical due to an
accident.
Which emergency measures you will take to tackle the situation.
I.
Investigative Question
A few decades ago, a tanker carrying poisonous chlorine gas leaked and
the gas spread over a large area in Lahore.
The accident killed a few
persons as well as animals.
Give some concrete proposals to avoid such an
accident in future.
2n’ Formula: Formula usedfor filling the electrons in shells.
Accuracy:
It refers to how close a measurement is to the true value.
Acid Rain:
Pollutant gases mixed with rain water come down as acid rain.
Activation Energy: Energy absorbed by the reactants and product molecules
in order to be converted into the transition state.
Aerobic Respiration: The process of respiration in the presence of oxygen.
Aldehydes: organic compounds containing the aldehydic functional group
i
(—C—H).
Aliphatic Compound:
(Acyclic compounds) Compounds containing open
chain of carbon atoms.
Alkanes or Saturated Hydrocarbons:
Hydrocarbons in which all the four
valencies are fully utilized or they contain single bonds only.
Alkenes:
Compounds containing a double bond between two carbons
atoms.
Alkyl Amine: Organic compounds containing amino group (-NHz2) as a
functional group.
Alkyl Halides: A family of organic compounds containing halogen atom as a
functional group.
Alkyl Radical:
When an alkyl molecule drops one of its many hydrogen
atoms.
Alkynes: Compounds containing a triple bond between two carbons atoms.
Anaerobic Respiration: Respiration without oxygen.
Aromatic Compounds: Compounds containing at least one benzene ring.
Arrhenius Acid: A chemical which gives proton (H’*) in water.
Arrhenius Base: A chemical compound which gives hydroxide ion (O'H) in
water.
Astrochemistry: |t is the study of molecules and ions occurring in stars and
interstellar space.
Atomic Mass: The mass of an atom of an element relative to the unit mass,
which is 1/12th of the mass of C-12.
Atomic Number:
The number of positively charged particles (protons)
present in the nucleus of an atom.
Atomic Size:
Average distance between the nucleus of an atom and its
outermost electronic shell.
Its units are m or pm.
Avogadro's Number: The huge number 6.022 x 10” is called Avogadro's
number.
Biochemistry: Which deals with the study of chemical compounds present
in the living things.
Bronsted Acid: A compound which can donate proton.
Bronsted Base: A compound which can accept proton.
Carboxylic Acids: Organic compounds containing carboxyl group
O
(— l — OH) asa functional group.
Catalytic Converter:
It is a device used in the exhaust of an automobile
which converts harmful gases produced in the engine.
Catenation: The self-linking property of carbon.
Chemistry: It deals with the composition and changes in matter and the laws
which govern these changes.
Colloidal Solution: A solution in which solute particles are bigger than those
present ina true solution and which cannot be filtered.
Combustion: Burning of an organic compound in an excess of oxygen.
Concentrated Solution: A solution that contains a relatively large amount
of a dissolved solute.
Concentration of a Solution: The amount of a solute which has been
dissolved in a particular amount of solvent.
Coordinate Covalent Bond: When the shared pair of electrons is provided
by one of the bonded atoms, a coordinate covalent bond is formed.
Covalent Bond: It is the force of attraction that arises between two atoms
due to mutual sharing of an electron pair.
Crystal Lattice: Three-dimensional arrangement of ions.
Cyclic or Ring Compounds: Compounds in which carbon atoms are linked
together to give a ring.
Dilute solution:
A solution that contains a relatively small amount of
dissolved solute.
Discharge Tube: A glass tube containing a gas at a very low pressure and
provided with electrodes to study the passage of electricity through the gas.
Dynamic Chemical Equilibrium:
When the rate of forward reaction
becomes equal to the rate of reverse reaction, at this stage the reaction is said
to bein a state of dynamic chemical equilibrium.
Electron: It is the smallest negatively charged particle present in all kinds of
atoms.
Its mass is 9.1095 x 10~' kg and carries
Electronegativity:
acharge -1.602 x 10 C.
|t is the power of an atom to attract the shared pair of
electrons.
Empirical Formula: The formula ofacompound, which shows the minimum
ratio present between its atoms.
Endothermic Reactions:
Those chemical reactions during which heat is
absorbed.
Enthalpy of Reaction:
Heat of reaction which takes place at constant
pressure.
Enthalpy: It is the measurement of energy in a thermodynamic system.
Environmental Chemistry: In this branch, we study the chemicals and other
pollutants present in the environment.
It also covers the effects of these
pollutants on living and non-living things.
Error: The difference between the measured value and the actual value.
Exothermic Reactions:
Those chemical reactions during which heat is
evolved.
Exotic states of Matter: These are not commonly encountered states of
matter, for example, dark matter.
Extranuclear Portion: Area surrounding the nucleus of an atom.
First lonization Energy:
The minimum amount of energy required to
remove an electron from the outermost electronic shell of an isolated
gaseous atom.
Its unit are KJ mol".
Formula Mass: Formula mass is the mass of a compound relative to the unit
mass which is 1/12th of the mass of C-12.
Functional Group: An atom or group of atoms or a bond whose presence
imparts characteristic properties to the organic compounds.
Geochemistry:
It covers the study of chemical composition of rocks and
minerals.
Global Warming: The progressive warming of the Earth's surface due to the
blanketing effect of COz, CH, and the water vapour present in the
atmosphere.
Heat content: The total amount of heat energy present in a molecule under
standard conditions.
Heat of neutralization: The heat given out during a neutralization reaction
when one mole water is formed from an acid and base is called the heat of
neutralization.
Heat of Reaction:
Heat evolved or absorbed during a chemical reaction
which takes place at any pressure.
Hydrated Salt: A salt with water molecular of crystallization.
Hydrocarbons: Compound of carbon and hydrogen only.
Inorganic Chemistry: The study of all other elements and their compounds
except carbon and its compounds.
Inorganic Compounds:
Compounds obtained form non-living things or
mineral sources or synthesized in the laboratory by reacting metals with non-
metals.
Intermolecular Forces: Forces between two separate molecules.
lonic Bond: A bond formed due to the electrostatic force of attraction
between oppositely charged ions.
Irreversible Reaction: Reaction which moves in one direction only; the
reactants react to give the product.
Isomerism: The phenomenon shown by the organic compounds having the
same molecular formula but different structural formula.
Isotopes:
Atoms of an element having the same atomic number but
different mass number.
Isotopic Abundance: The natural abundance of an isotope.
Ketones: Organic compounds containing the ketonic functional group
O
(R—C—R).
Lipids: A group of organic compounds which serve as an energy reserve.
Liquid crystals: |t is a state of matter whose properties are between those of
liquids and solids.
Mass number: The total number of protons and neutrons present in the
nucleus of an atom.
Medicinal Chemistry:
Designing and synthesizing medicines or drugs
which are useful to mankind.
Metallic Bond:
When positively charged metal ions are held together by
freely moving electrons, the bond formed is called a metallic bond.
Metallic Lustre: Shine present on metallic surfaces.
Modern Periodic Table:
A table in which elements are arranged in
ascending order oftheir atomic numbers.
Molar Mass: The mass of an element or a compound which contains
Avogadro's number of particles.
Molecular Formula: The formula of an element or a compound which tells
the actual number of atoms present in the molecule of that element or a
compound.
Molecular Mass: Molecular mass is the mass of the molecule of an element
ora compound relative to the unit mass, which is 1/12th of the mass of C-12.
Neutralization: Acids and bases react together to form salts and water and,
in this way, they neutralize the properties of each other.
This reaction is called
neutralization reaction.
Neutron: It is the smallest neutral particle present in the nucleus of atoms.
Its
mass is slightly more than that of a proton.
Nuclear Chemistry: This branch deals with the reactions taking place in the
nucleus of an atom.
Nucleus: Central part of an atom where most of its mass is concentrated.
Its
size is very Small as compared to the size of the atom.
Octet Rule: When an atom has eight electrons in its outer most shell, it is said
to be stable and does not combine with other atoms to reduce its energy.
This
is called octet rule.
Orbit: the circular path of
an electron around the nucleus.
Organic Chemistry: The branch of chemistry in which we study the
compounds
of carbon.
Organic Compounds: Compounds obtained from living or plant and animal
sources and which can be synthesized in the laboratory.
All the organic
compounds contain carbon as an essential element.
Oxidation: A process in which an electron or electrons are lost.
Oxidising Agent: A substance which accepts an electron or electrons.
Parts per Million:
One part per million parts of the solid, liquid and gas
mixture in which pollutant is formed.
Physical Chemistry: This branch investigates how substances behave on an
atomic or molecular level and how physical laws govern the specific
characteristics of atoms and molecules.
Plasma: It is the fourth state of matter.
It is composed of particles with very
high kinetic energy.
Pollutant:
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance present in such
concentration as may be injurious to health.
Polymer Chemistry: |t focuses on the properties, structure and synthesis of
polymers and macromolecules.
Precision: It refers to how close measurements of the same item are to each
other.
Proton:
It is the smallest positively charged particle present in all kind of
atoms.
The mass of this particle is equal to the mass of hydrogen nucleus (H’).
Radioactive rays:
Rays emitted from radioactive elements or their
compounds, which can cause fogging of the photographic plates.
Radioactive Isotopes: Isotopes of elements which throw out excess energy
in the form of radiation.
Radiocarbon Dating: A method forfinding out the age of a historical object
containing organic material with the help of " C.
Random Error: Error which a student commits during measurement.
Reducing Agent: A substance which loses an electron or electrons.
Reduction: A process in which an electron or electrons are gained.
Reversible Reaction: A chemical reaction, which takes place in both
directions, forward as well as backward.
Saturated Solution: A solution, which contains the maximum amount of a
solute at a particular temperature and which is unable to dissolve further
amount of solute in it.
SI Units:
A common system of units based on metric system.
Solubility:
The amount of a solute in grams which has been dissolved in
100g ofa solvent at a particular temperature to prepare a saturated solution.
Strong Acid: An acid which ionizes completely in water.
Strong Base: A base which can ionize completely in water giving excess of
hydroxide ions.
Structural Formula: The formula which shows the arrangement of atoms in
a compound.
Substitution Reaction: A reaction which occurs when an atom ora group of
atoms from the reagent displaces an atom or group of atoms from the
organic reactant.
Supercritical Fluids:
They are highly compressed gases which show the
properties of both gases and Liquids.
Surrounding: Everything else which does not fall in the system.
System: Anything under consideration for the purpose of study.
Systematic Error:
Error which naturally occurs when we use tools for
measurement.
Transition Elements:
Elements having incomplete penultimate (next inner
to the outermost) electronic shell.
Transition State: A state of molecules when they are undergoing breakage
or formation of bonds.
Unified Atomic Mass Unit: Unit of a new scale, which is equal to 1/12th of
the mass of C-12.
Unsaturated Hydrocarbons:
Hydrocarbons containing double or triple
bonds.
Unsaturated Solution: A solution, which can dissolve further amount of a
solute at a particular temperature.
Vital Force:
The imaginary supernatural force which was supposed to be
present in all those compounds which were obtained from living things.
Water of Crystallization:
The number of water molecules present in the
crystals of a solid.
Weak Acid:
An acid which ionizes partially in water.
Weak Base:
A base which ionizes partially in water.
A
C
Environmental Chemistry3
Acceptor
Accuracy
39 _| Carbon Dioxide
163 | Catalyst
Enthalpy of Reaction
ae molecule
Acid
Air pollutants
| Chemical Formula
Air Quality Index
| Chemical Reaction
Alkanes
147 | Colloidal Solution
Alkenes
150 | Combustion
142 | FirstlonizationEnergy
Alkyl halide
| Compound
Alkynes
150 | Conductor
Allotropic forms
Conjugate acid
Allotropy
Conjugate Base
gg | Geochemistry
Analytical chemistry
Covalent Bond
Arrhenius acid
tea
Arrhenius Base
Arrhenius Concept
Astrochemistry
Atmosphere
131 | Discharge Tube
Atom
Atomic Mass
| Donor
Atomic Number
| Doublebond
36 | Hydroxyl lon
Atomic Radius
| DoubleCovalentBond
Atomic Size
112 | Duplet Rule
Avogadro's Number
Argon
Acid Rain
Aerobic Respiration
Chemistry
134 | Chemical Bond
77 ‘| Chemical Equation
33 _ | Exothermic
60 arn
Crystal lattice
Amphoteric Compound 100
Binary Covalent
Compound
Biochemistry
Derived Unit
Dynamic Equilibrium
Electronegativity
| Element
Endothermic
Enthalpy
Heterogenous mixture
lon
| Hydrocarbons
Inorganic Chemistry
IntermolecularForces
lonic Bond
lonization Ener
Irreversible Reaction
Isotopes
113 | |UPAC System
H
A
Buckminster fullerene
BronstedLowryBase
Electron Affinity
Empirical Formula
Hydroxonium
Bronsted Lowry Acid
Groups
Halogenation
Experiment
Electron
Graphite
Structure
Greenhouse effect
Base
Anaerobic Respiration 77 | Coordinate Covalent Bond 39 Global Warming
| Cracking
John Dalton
K
Krypton
Radioactive lsotopes
Random Error
Reduction
Lipids
Relative atomic mass
Liquid Crystal
Reversible Reaction
Lord Rutherford
Mass Number
Medicinal Chemistry
Metallic Bond
Metallic Character
iS
Shell
| unit
At
States of Matter
Single Bond
Saturated Solution
Single Covalent Bond
Modern Periodic Table
Solution
Molar Mass
Solubility
Mole
Structure of Atom
Monoclinic
Super critical fluid
Surrounding
System
Systematic Error
Mixture
Molecular Formula
N
Neutralization
Neutron
Nuclear Chemistry
Noble Gases
Suspension
Nucleus
O
Transition Elements
Triple Bond
Triple Covalent Bond
U
Organic Chemistry
Unsaturated Solution
Organic Compound
p
Periodic Table
Periods
Physical Chemistry
Plasma
Polymer Chemistry
Precision
Proton
Transition State
Octet Rule
Orbit
Bibliography
https://phototheque.pasteur.fr/en/feature/261/umip-champiqnons/page/1
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/concentration-of-a-solution/
https://oppla.eu/new-handbook-Implementation-nature-based-solutions-water-security
https://www.liveworksheets.com/w/en/science/339045
https://krishijagran.com/crop-care/why-cobalt-is-an-essentialhttpos://kids.kiddle.co/NASA
https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-earths
https://www.lobachemie.com/resources/periodic-table.aspx
httos://medium.com/ hanschmitz7/periodic-table-of-elements-68ce8774874f
https://www.priyamstudycentre.com/2019/01/electron-configuration.html
https://www.scasd.org/cms/lib5/PA01000006/Centricity/Domain/1441/CHM15.2 Trends.pdf
https://www.simply.science/images/content/biology/blochemis
Bibliography
https://brainly.in/question/10728550
https://studymind.co.uk/notes/ionic-compounds/
https://studymind.co.uk/notes/metals-non-metals/
https://askwilonline.com/2017/07/ionic-bonding-chemistry.html
httos://www.embibe.com/exams/ions/
https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/quides/zyydnga/revisi
https://chemistrybytes.com/intermolecular-forces-of-attraction/
https://www.toppr.com/ask/question/structure-of-diamond-is/
https://nationaltoday.com/mole-day/
https://www.freepik.com/premium-vector/explosion-with-smoke 20226418.htm
https://finddifferencebetween.com/difference-between-evaporation-and-boiling/
https://media.brainly.com/image/rs:fillAw:1080/q:75/plain/https://us-static.z.
