[Topic 1.1 What is Chemistry?]
Chemistry is the branch of science which deals with the properties,
composition and the structure of substances.
It also deals with the physical and
chemical changes in matter and the laws or principles which govern these
changes.
Determination of composition represents finding out percentages of
elements and compounds in a sample of matter.
Structure of matter means the
arrangement of atoms in matter.
Both physical and chemical changes may be
brought about by absorption or evolution of energy.
Branches of Chemistry
To understand the widely spread complex subject of chemistry and to
concentrate on its specific aspects, chemistry is divided into many distinct
branches.
These branches have distinct areas of study for the scientists to focus
on and to achieve breakthroughs and advancements.
1.Physical Chemistry
This branch investigates how substances behave at atomic and molecular
levels.
It provides clear explanation as to how fundamental physical laws
governing our world cause atoms and molecules to show specific characteristics
and in turn react to give huge structures related to life.
Physical chemistry is also
used to predict and change the rates of reactions and thus optimize the
conditions to carry out the reactions on industrial scale.
2.
Inorganic Chemistry
It is the study of the synthesis, composition, properties and structure of
elements and compounds that contain little or no carbon.
An inorganic
substance can be composed of metals, nonmetals or a mixture of these, salts,
acids and bases.
Inorganic compounds are used as fertilizers, medicines,
catalysts, pigments, coatings and much more.
3.
Organic Chemistry
It is the branch of chemistry that deals with the carbon compounds
(hydrocarbons and their derivatives) other than its simple salts like carbonates,
bicarbonates, oxides and carbides.
In this branch, we study the structure,
formation, properties, composition and reactions of carbon containing
compounds.
Organic compounds are found in all forms of life and are also
essential for life.
4.
Environmental Chemistry
It is the scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that
occur in this planet.
In this subject, we study the sources, reactions, effects and
fates of chemical species in the air, soil and water environments.
Without this, it
would be impossible to study the effects that humans have on the environment
through the release of chemicals.
It helps in understanding the causes, effects
and solutions of different types of pollution.
5.
Analytical Chemistry
This branch of chemistry deals with the analysis of different substances.
It
involves separation, identification and determination of the concentration of the
components present in material things.
Nowadays the field of analytical
chemistry generally involves the use of modern and sophisticated instruments to
analyze the matter.
6.
Biochemistry
It is the branch of chemistry in which we understand life through chemical
processes.
It is the study of chemical substances and vital processes occurring in
living organisms.
Biochemistry provides insights into the structure and function
of molecules such as proteins, carbohydrates, lipids and nucleic acids.
7.
Nuclear Chemistry
Nuclear chemistry deals with the reactions taking place in the nucleus of
an atom.
It deals with radioactivity, nuclear processes and transformation in the
nuclei of atoms.
Nuclear chemistry has many applications in agriculture,
medicine, industry and research.
8.
Polymer Chemistry
Polymers are large molecules made by linking together a series of
building blocks.
Polymer chemistry focuses on the properties, structure and
synthesis of polymers and macromolecules.
Many materials present in the living
organisms including proteins, cellulose and nucleic acids are naturally occurring
polymers.
9.
Geochemistry
The study of chemical composition of Earth and its sources and minerals is
called geochemistry.
Apart from its use in minerals exploration, geochemical
mapping today has applications in environmental monitoring, forestry and
medical research.
\ul
yy,
Geothermal heat pump uses a pump to transfer underground water into the
buildings during the winter
to heat them and in the summer to cool them.
10.
Medicinal Chemistry
In this branch of chemistry, the chemist tries to design and synthesize
medicines or drugs which are beneficial for mankind.
It includes the discovery,
delivery, absorption and metabolism of drugs in human body.
11.
Astrochemistry
It is the study of molecules and ions recurring in space and interstellar
space.
In this discipline we study the abundance and reactions of atoms,
molecules and ions in the universe and interaction of these species with radiation.
A lunar mission has recently brought samples from the Moon.
The following
experiments were then carried out on it.
Point out the branch of chemistry
these experiments are related to.
Experiment
Branch of Chemistry
Determining its composition
Studying the physical properties
of materials
itcontains
3.
Carrying out chemical reactions
with usual inorganic reagents
